2
How a Brain Makes a Mind
Physics and psychology split as brain theories
were born

A historical watershed: When physicists
were also neuroscientists
Several of the greatest physicists during the nineteenth century were also great psychologists or neuroscientists. Surprisingly, this was no longer true at the beginning of the
twentieth century. Why not? An answer to this question clari!es the kind of problem
that linking mind to brain is, and the nature of recent progress in doing so. I will briefly
frame this answer in terms of the issues that confronted these great scientists at the end
of the nineteenth century.
In addition to carrying out great work in physics, scientists such as Hermann von
Helmholtz in Germany, Clerk Maxwell in England, and Ernst Mach in Austria also
made seminal contributions to psychology and neuroscience. Their interests in the
structure of physical space and time were enhanced by a fascination with psychological
space and time. Their contributions to understanding the observed world developed
side-by-side their analysis of the observer.
For example, every physicist knows about the Mach numbers which help to understand supersonic flight, and about the influence of Mach’s critique of classical physical
concepts about space and time upon Albert Einstein’s thinking during his development of General Relativity Theory. Mach is also famous, however, for his investigation
of the Mach bands in vision. Mach bands are perceived bright and dark bands that do
not match the measured physical luminances in these visual displays, as illustrated
in Figure 2.1. Surprisingly few scientists have studied both Mach numbers and Mach
bands in school. Indeed, in 1914 Mach expressed “the profound conviction that the
foundations of science as a whole, and of physics in particular, await their next great elucidations from the side of biology, and especially from the analysis of the sensations . . .
Psychological observation on the one side and physical observation on the other may
make such progress that they will ultimately come into contact, and that in this way
new facts may be brought to light. The result of this investigation will not be a dualism but rather a science which, embracing both the organic and the inorganic, shall

50

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN. Stephen Grossberg, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2021.
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780190070557.003.0002

How a Brain Makes a Mind

FIGURE 2.1. Along the boundaries between adjacent shades of
gray, lateral inhibition makes the darker area appear even darker,
and the lighter area appear even lighter.

interpret the facts that are common to the two departments” (Mach, 1914).
In a similar vein, every physicist knows about
Maxwell’s fundamental contributions to electromagnetic
theory, notably the famous Maxwell’s equations, upon
which so many modern inventions—electric lights, computers, electric household appliances of all kinds, telephones, radio, TV, cell phones, etc.—are based. Maxwell
also made famous contributions to the molecular theory
of gases. Maxwell is often considered one of the top three
theoretical physicists to have ever lived, along with Isaac
Newton and Albert Einstein (Harman, 1990). In addition
to these great contributions to physics, Maxwell was an influential psychologist. He developed a “trichromatic color
theory” which anticipated the discovery that there are
three distinct classes of color-sensitive photoreceptors, or
cones, in the normal human retina.
Helmholtz’s life in many ways epitomizes an interdisciplinary scienti!c career that crossed seamlessly between
biology and physics. Trained as a medical doctor, his experiments on the velocity of electrical signals in nerve
pathways and how they caused movements led him to help
discover the Principle of Conservation of Energy, which
is one of the cornerstones of nineteenth-century physics.
He also made fundamental contributions to optics, which
served as a foundation for his classical contributions to
visual perception (Helmholtz, 1866). His work in physical
acoustics likewise supported his major contributions to
understanding auditory perception and music (Helmholtz,
1875). Thus, during the last half of the nineteenth century,
a number of great scientists functioned successfully in an
interdisciplinary research mode and made lasting contributions to both the physical sciences, and the psychological and brain sciences.
It is often accepted as a truism that success breeds success, just as money makes money. The great interdisciplinary successes of Helmholtz, Maxwell, and Mach might
have been expected to breed droves of dedicated interdisciplinary disciples. This did not, however, occur. In the next
generation of physicists, Albert Einstein himself, in a letter

|

51

to his friend Queen Elizabeth of Belgium in 1933, wrote:
“Most of us prefer to look outside rather than inside ourselves; for in the latter case we see but a dark hole, which
means: nothing at all.” We see a “dark hole, which means
nothing at all” because the neural computations that regulate our daily experiences are inaccessible to us due to the
property of cognitive impenetrability. Because of this impenetrability, we can behave in a world of interacting percepts, feelings, and ideas without having to worry about,
or to be distracted by, our individual nerve cells, electrical
potentials, and chemical transmitters. We experience the
apparent simplicity of our behavioral mastery rather than
the actual complexity of its generative neural machinery.
Once we acknowledge that neural computations are
not intuitively obvious, we should not be surprised that
they may seem strange or even bizarre when we !nally discover them, albeit also conceptually simple once you learn
to think in a new way about how brains self-organize. Once
we acknowledge that neural computations generate behaviors in an interactive fashion across large networks of neurons, we should not be surprised if the boundary between
external reality and internal illusion cannot be sharply
drawn. These themes will be dramatically illustrated when
I explain how our brains see, starting in Chapter 3.
These considerations do not, however, explain why
even Einstein was uninterested in trying to cast scienti!c
light on the “dark hole” of the mind. Why did not Einstein
try to build upon the insights of his predecessors Maxwell
and Mach in psychology and neuroscience, in the way that
he did in physics through his great work on the kinetic
theory of gases and relativity theory?
Einstein’s comment reflects a major schism that occurred between the physical and brain sciences towards
the end of the nineteenth century. Scientists whose work
was previously greatly energized by interdisciplinary investigations of physics and psychology were rapidly replaced by scientists who rarely had even a rudimentary
knowledge of the other !eld. Although the explosion
of scienti!c knowledge during the twentieth century,
with its attendant specialization, surely contributed to
this schism, deeper intellectual factors were, I believe,
the immediate trigger. An understanding of these factors is useful for appreciating the scienti!c climate in
which modeling how the brain works has been carried
out during most of the twentieth century, and the nature
of the major scienti!c revolution that we are now experiencing, and which has been accelerating during the last
half-century.
Basic causes of this schism emerged from the scienti!c discoveries of the very pioneers, such as Helmholtz,
Maxwell, and Mach, who built such successful interdisciplinary careers. Two examples from Helmholtz’s work on
visual perception are illustrative.

52

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

The Three N’s: Nonlinear,
Nonlocal, and Nonstationary
Color !eory. Isaac Newton reported in 1704 his great
discovery that white light is composed of equal intensities of all the visible wavelengths of light (Newton, 1704).
Newton showed this by using a prism to refract the different colored components of white light into a rainbow.
The Newtonian de!nition of white light is based on measuring the light at individual positions in space. In contrast,
Helmholtz realized that the average color of a scene is perceived to be desaturated; that is, it tends to look more white
than it really is. Thus, if the scene is illuminated with a certain hue—say reddish at sunset or bluish if you are under
water—then that color tends to be neutralized so that we
can better see the “real” colors of objects in the scene.
As Helmholtz began to realize, conscious percepts of
colors, including white, depend upon the relationships
between multiple lit positions of a scene or picture. Thus,
instead of being reducible to measurements at each position, the analysis of how humans perceive white light at
each position necessitates an investigation of long-range
(or nonlocal) interactions across the positions of a network. These network interactions help to compensate for
variable illumination conditions, or to “discount the illuminant,” so that humans and other species can better see
the actual colors of visible surfaces under a wide variety of
illumination conditions.
The neural process whereby an illuminant is discounted is still the subject of intensive experimental and
theoretical investigation. Discounting the illuminant
somehow “divides out” the illuminant so that the real
colors of a scene can be perceived. Any process, like division, that involves operations other than addition and subtraction is said to be nonlinear. How the brain discounts
the illuminant using nonlocal and nonlinear interactions
will be discussed in Chapter 3.
Learning, expectation, and matching. Helmholtz faced
another barrier when he attempted to conceptualize the
process of visual perception. As I noted in Chapter 1, he
developed the doctrine of unconscious inference to express
the idea that we often perceive what we expect to perceive
based on past learning. Helmholtz’s doctrine is recast in
the more modern terminology of Adaptive Resonance
Theory in Figure 2.2. This !gure illustrates how environmentally activated inputs can drive a bottom-up learning
process, via adaptive weights or long-term memory (LTM)
traces, that determines which cells will selectively respond
to these inputs in the future. These selective cells are called
recognition categories. When recognition categories are activated, they can trigger the read-out of learned top-down

expectations via their own LTM traces. Such expectations
are matched against the bottom-up inputs across a network of feature-selective cells. These top-down expectations play the role of an unconscious inference. In order
to simplify the !gure, arrays of connections between processing stages are represented by a single connection. This
simpli!ed notation is used throughout the book, where
appropriate.
The bottom-up and top-down signals cooperate and
compete through the matching process. The effect of this
matching process is to generate a consensus that leads
to the !nal percept by using excitatory (or cooperative)
bottom-up and top-down signals to select and focus attention upon expected combinations of features, and inhibitory (or competitive) interactions within each processing level to suppress irrelevant features and categories.
Cooperative and competitive matching also requires nonlinear and nonlocal interactions. In addition, the bottomup and top-down learning processes are nonstationary;
that is, they are processes that change their LTM traces
through time in order to adapt to a changing world.
In summary, Helmholtz’s experimental discoveries
led him to at least instinctively realize that a theoretical
understanding of visual perception would require the discovery of new nonlinear, nonlocal, and nonstationary intuitive concepts and mathematical equations. In contrast,
much physical theorizing during the nineteenth century
used linear, local, and stationary mathematics. Since theoretical scientists rely upon appropriate mathematical
concepts and methods with which to express and develop

FIGURE 2.2. Feature-category resonances enable us to rapidly
learn how to recognize objects without experiencing catastrophic forgetting. Attentive matching between bottom-up
feature pattern inputs and top- down expectations prevent catastrophic forgetting by focusing object attention upon expected
patterns of features, while suppressing outlier features that
might otherwise have caused catastrophic forgetting if they were
learned also.

How a Brain Makes a Mind

their deepest intuitive ideas, the inability of nineteenthcentury physical concepts and mathematics to explain
psychological and neurobiological data created an intellectual crisis for all theorists who might have wished to
study mind and brain.
This schism was exacerbated by the fact that the major
revolutions of twentieth-century physics could be supported by nineteenth-century mathematics. For example,
Einstein’s Special Theory of Relativity needed only elementary algebra to carry out its computations (Einstein,
1905). The genius in this theory was in knowing what was
fundamental and how to think about it. When Einstein
realized that he needed a more advanced type of mathematics to express the intuitions that led to the theory of
General Relativity (Einstein, 1915), his burden was significantly lightened by the help he received from his friend,
Marcel Grossmann, who introduced him to nineteenthcentury Riemannian geometry, which provided a perfect
tool. As the early developers of quantum mechanics, such
as Werner Heisenberg and Max Born, struggled to express their intuitive insights, they too were greatly aided
by nineteenth-century mathematics, notably the theory
of matrices. Quantum mechanics also bene!ted from the
existence of linear operator theory that had been significantly developed by one of the greatest nineteenth- and
early twentieth-century mathematicians, David Hilbert.

A century of controversy as
a ma or scientific revolution
is born
A major approach-avoidance hereby arose in the practice
of theoretical science at the end of the nineteenth century:
Theoretical physicists abandoned psychology and neuroscience to rapidly fashion physical theories about the external
world that could be quantitatively supported by available
mathematical concepts and methods. Psychologists and
neuroscientists returned the favor by abandoning physical
concepts and mathematics that seemed irrelevant to their
data and, over time, by also eschewing and even denigrating theoretical and mathematical training in general. This
bifurcation was already apparent during the unfolding of
Helmholtz’s scienti!c life. Beginning his career as a medical doctor, and progressing to his interdisciplinary studies
that crossed between mind, brain, and the external physical world, he ended his career as the !rst President and
Director of the new Physico-Technical Institute in Berlin
after leaving psychology and physiology behind.
Left without an appropriate framework of concepts
and mathematical techniques for interpreting and unifying their experiments, psychologists and neuroscientists
nonetheless went about accumulating one of the largest

|

53

and most sophisticated sets of databases in the history of
science. Remarkably, they accomplished this feat during a
century of controversy that was spawned by the unavailability of a unifying theoretical and mathematical framework for explaining their data. Even as recently as 1975,
Ernest Hilgard and Gordon Bower noted on page 2 of their
classic textbook Theories of Learning that “Psychology
seems to be constantly in a state of ferment and change, if
not of turmoil and revolution” (Hilgard and Bower, 1975).
While most mind and brain experimentalists ignored theory, and most theorists looked for more hospitable frontiers, there arose the widespread tendency to !ll
this theoretical vacuum by interpreting brain function in
terms of whatever technology happened to be current. The
ever-expanding list of technological metaphors to which
the brain has been compared includes telegraph circuits,
hydraulic systems, information processing channels,
digital computers, linear control systems, catastrophes
(in the mathematical sense of René Thom (Thom, 1977),
holograms, spin glasses, Bayesian networks, and Deep
Learning. All of these metaphors have been unable to explain substantial databases that link mind and brain, since
none of them arose from a sustained analysis of mind and
brain data.
The schism between physics and neuroscience encouraged many physicists to believe that no theories of mind
and brain exist. An inquiry about available theories by an
interested physicist more often than not would con!rm
this impression, because the schism prevented most experimental psychologists and neuroscientists from getting the
training needed to understand and value the theories that
were already explaining, and in a principled way, difficult
nonlinear, nonlocal, and nonstationary data about mind
and brain. Indeed, experimentalists who might otherwise
have understood the signi!cance of these new insights
from properties of their own data typically had no theoretical or mathematical training at all. This gap in training
created serious literacy and communication problems over
and beyond the very real intellectual challenges inherent
in understanding the phenomena themselves.
I hope that this brief summary helps to put into historical perspective why it has taken so long to begin to theoretically understand how a brain can give rise to a mind. Such
progress required the introduction of a new scienti!c paradigm that simultaneously discovered new conceptual intuitions and new mathematics with which to understand the
nonlinear, nonlocal, and nonstationary laws that link brain
to mind. In many scienti!c revolutions, such as relativity
theory and quantum mechanics, once the new physical intuitions were discovered, relevant mathematics was available with which to convert them into rigorous theoretical
science. In the mind and brain sciences, we have not been
so lucky, since both new intuitions and new mathematics
needed to be developed. The Newtonian revolution was also
of this kind, since Newton had to both derive the laws of

54

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

celestial mechanics and to discover calculus with which to
mathematically analyze them. My own scienti!c work since
1957, when I was a Freshman in Dartmouth College, has
been devoted to introducing and developing foundational
intuitions, mathematics, and the behavioral and neural
models built upon them into the mind-brain sciences. I
could never have imagined then how much I would be able
to discover and understand with the help of many gifted
PhD student, postdoctoral fellow, and faculty collaborators.
As in the case of the Newtonian revolution, the mindbrain revolution is a difficult one to understand. Without
new interdisciplinary intuitions about the functional
meaning of the data, there is no possibility of understanding. But without new mathematics, there is no way to
realize these intuitions in rigorous neural models that can
be communicated to other scientists in a compelling way.
It needs also to be said that, once one realizes how to think
intuitively about various of these processes, many of their
key ideas can be described simply in story form. This book
is devoted to telling you some of these stories.
What cannot be achieved in this way is a sense of the
inevitability of these ideas. That can best be seen, !rst, by
understanding how elegantly key psychological facts arise
as emergent, or interactive, properties of neural networks
and, second, by seeing how the most basic properties of
brain designs and mechanisms can be proved with simple
mathematics, often with little more than elementary algebra and simple properties of differential equations. I will
include some of this mathematics in the book to show you
what I mean, but the book can be enjoyed and understood
without it.
Fortunately for the !eld as a whole, during the past
thirty years, a number of new academic departments,
research centers, societies, and journals have been established with which to expedite the discovery and transmission of this new interdisciplinary knowledge. I have
been fortunate to have had the opportunity to found and
lead several of these institutions. My 2010 essay Towards
Building a Neural Networks Community (Grossberg,
2010) provides a personal account of how this happened to
me. This essay can also be downloaded from sites.bu.edu/
steveg/!les/2016/06/GrossbergNNeditorial2010.pdf.

The Astonishing Hypothesis
Today, as during the time of great pioneering scientists like
Helmholtz, Maxwell, and Mach, we are confronted with
the same fundamental questions: How are our experiences
of the world represented by the brain? How can we !nd
a method and a language to connect two such apparently
different types of descriptions? Finding the link between
mind and brain is particularly important if we ever want
to understand consciousness: A theory of consciousness

that cannot explain psychological experiences and data
fails to deal with the contents of consciousness.
Francis Crick, who is most famous for his classical
Nobel Prize–winning work on understanding DNA,
published a book in 1994, with the arresting title The
Astonishing Hypothesis, in which he discussed some aspects of consciousness (Frick, 1994). The astonishing hypothesis refers to the fact that all of our mental phenomena
arise from activities of the nerve cells, or neurons, of our
brains. Crick claimed that “this hypothesis is so alien to
the ideas of most people alive today that it can truly be
called astonishing” (p. 3). Why is that? For centuries, due
to the problem of cognitive impenetrability, people did not
even realize that the brain is the seat of the mind. We are
immediately aware of our own personal behavioral experiences, but have to be taught about neurons in school. Even
after being taught, the activities of individual nerve cells
do not look at all like our daily experiences.

Brains are designed to
control behavioral success
A species could have the most beautiful neurons imaginable, but if these individual neurons were not properly designed to be able to interact together in correctly designed
neural networks to cause adaptive behaviors, then that species could not survive evolution’s challenges. Thus, any
theory that hopes to link brain to mind, using design principles that have been shaped by evolution, needs to describe
the computational level on which brain mechanisms interact to control behavioral success. Such interactive properties are often called emergent properties, because they are
not properties of the individual neurons taken in isolation.
Measuring emergent brain properties directly is not
something that even the most advanced experimental
techniques can do easily, although recent methods using
electrode arrays to simultaneously record from multiple
neurons in multiple brain areas are approaching this goal,
as in many experiments of MIT neuroscientist Earl Miller
and his colleagues; e.g., Wutz et al. (2018). Even the very
existence of neurons was a controversial issue at the beginning of the twentieth century. At that time, even this
most basic fact about the brain was vigorously debated
by two of the greatest names in neuroscience—Ramon y
Cajal of Spain and Camillo Golgi of Italy. It was such a
hot issue that a strange thing happened on the day in 1906
that Cajal and Golgi shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology
or Medicine for their experimental work in neuroscience.
Golgi had discovered a revolutionary staining method
whereby brain tissue could be visualized. Using his
method, he thought that nerve !bers were part of a continuous electrical network, or reticulum, and thus proposed

How a Brain Makes a Mind

his Reticular Theory. Cajal modi!ed the Golgi method
to discover that individual neurons exist. Cajal’s Neuron
Doctrine is now taken for granted as gospel. However, on
the day that Cajal and Golgi shared the Nobel Prize, Golgi
used his own Nobel lecture to deny that individual neurons
exist, even as Cajal asserted that they do (e.g., Warmflash,
2016)! Controversy existed then in psychology and neuroscience, and it continues to exist today. How could it be
otherwise, given the complexity of the subject matter, and
its importance to human identity and society?

Keeping the forest, trees,
and leaves all in view
How can such different levels of description—behavior,
neural networks, and individual neurons in all their
complexity—be kept in mind all at once? This is a little
like trying to keep in mind everything that is known about
a whole forest, its individual trees, and all the leaves on all
the trees. Such a feat requires the use of a scienti!c language that is powerful enough to simultaneously express
all three levels in a natural way, including the emergent
properties of very large numbers of interacting neurons
that map onto properties of behavior. As is often the case
in science, this is best done using a mathematical language,
since only mathematics has the precision to express such
complexity in direct and unambiguous terms.
Despite the widespread prejudice that “math is hard,” in
reality mathematics can make difficult concepts and mechanisms much simpler to understand. That is why scientists
have always turned to mathematics to express their most
profound insights. Differential equations are the universally accepted mathematical formalism in many scienti!c
disciplines, including physics, because they describe how
events evolve in time. They are called “differential” equations because they describe the rates, or “differentials,”
with which processes evolve in time. By summing up, or
integrating, all of these changes through time, one can predict how the processes evolve as time goes on. It turns out
that just a few different types of differential equations, indexed properly to keep track of which neurons they are describing, can conveniently describe the dynamics of huge
numbers of individual neurons, how they interact in neural
networks, and the behavioral properties that emerge from
these interactions. Such a language has been getting developed within the !eld of neural networks for the last sixty
years, with steadily accelerating progress since the 1960s.
As I remarked above, I began my own odyssey to discover intuitive concepts and mathematical equations
that link brain to mind in 1957 when I was a Freshman
undergraduate student at Dartmouth College. I then
had the thrilling experience, triggered when I took the

|

55

Introductory Psychology course, of discovering laws
for short-term memory (STM), medium-term memory
(MTM), and long-term memory (LTM) whose variants
are still used by most computational neuroscientists. By
showing how these interacting laws could explain data
about human learning, I introduced, by example, the paradigm of using systems of nonlinear differential equations
to describe neural networks whose emergent properties
match observable behaviors.
Despite these successes, given the anti-theoretical paradigm that governed the mind and brain sciences then, it took
ten years, until 1967 (Grossberg, 1967, 1968d) before I could
get these results published in archival journals. After that,
it took many more years before they began to have a large
scienti!c impact. The central intellectual project of my life
continues to be one of contributing to the exciting paradigm
of explaining how our brains make our minds, how these
insights help to explain what goes wrong in our brains when
we are afflicted with mental disorders, and how these discoveries can be used to develop biologically-inspired solutions to
large-scale problems in engineering and technology.
Given this rocky start, I am particularly grateful that this
combination of biological discovery and technological innovation has been acknowledged by awards from several scienti!c
societies, including most recently the 2015 Norman Anderson
Lifetime Achievement Award of the Society of Experimental
Psychologists (http://www.sepsych.org/awards.php), the 2017
Frank Rosenblatt Award in computational neuroscience of
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (http://
sites.ieee.org/r1/2016/08/24/r1-fellow- stephen- grossbergreceive-ieee-frank-rosenblatt-award/), and the 2019 Donald
O. Hebb award of the International Neural Network Society
(https://www.inns.org).

hy differential e uations
The case of phonemic
restoration
Let me give you a concrete example, right away, of why
differential equations are so important in linking brain to
mind. In Chapter 1, I mentioned the phenomenon of phonemic restoration (Figure 1.22). I pointed out that, when
listening to words like “delivery” and “deliberation”, replacing the “v” and “b” with broad-band noise still enables
the complete words to be heard, but replacing the letters
with silence does not support restoration. Likewise, given
a rapidly presented sentence with broad-band noise immediately occurring before “eel is on the . . . ,” if the last word
after “the” is “table,” then “noise-eel” can sound like “meal,”
whereas if the last word is “wagon,” then “noise-eel” can
sound like “wheel,” and so on. I suggested that, as words,

56

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

or other sequences of auditory items, enter your brain, they
are stored in a working memory, as in Figures 1.6 and 1.23.
As sequences of items enter the working memory, they are
categorized at a higher processing level. Each of these categories responds selectively to a list of items that is stored
in working memory, and is thus called a list chunk. List
chunks continue to compete for dominance as more items
are stored in working memory (Figure 1.23a), in order to
choose the list chunk that best represents, or predicts, the
currently stored sequence of items. As this competition for
list chunk dominance unfolds through time, the winning
list chunks start to activate top-down learned expectations
that get matched against the stored working memory items
(Figure 1.23b). The matching process selects those items
that match the sounds which are expected in the sentence, and suppresses those that are not. As the selected
bottom-up and top-down signals cyclically reinforce each
other through feedback exchanges, the selected neuronal
activities start to “resonate,” or to mutually reinforce one
another (Figures 1.23c and 1.23d), until we become conscious of the resonating activities, but not necessarily all
of the sounds, including noise, that were initially stored in
the working memory.
Given that a resonant event may lag behind the environmental inputs that cause it, we need to distinguish
perceived psychological time from the times at which
inputs are presented. In particular, we need to explain how
“future” inputs—like “wagon”—can influence the conscious perception of “past” inputs—as when “noise-eel”
sounds like “wheel”. The “formal” time variable that is
used to de!ne the “differentials” in the underlying differential equations also labels the times at which the inputs
turn on and off. The times at which we consciously hear
sounds like “wheel” are emergent properties of these differential equations.
These emergent properties explain how sounds may be
consciously perceived to flow from past to future, in the
order that they were received in “formal time”, despite the
fact that future contextual information can alter what we
consciously perceive in the past. I suggest that this is accomplished by a resonant wave that develops from past to
future, even while it incorporates future contextual constraints into its top-down matching process, until each
event in the resonance equilibrates. Only the resonant
wave enters consciousness. It is driven by external inputs
in the order that they are received, but it can incorporate
future constraints into the resonance until the time that
the resonance becomes suprathreshold and conscious.
This resonant wave is called an Item-List resonance (Table
1.4) because winning list chunks select and bind together
compatible sequences of items that are stored in working
memory to determine what we consciously hear.
The hypothesis that “conscious speech is a resonant
wave” represents a revolutionary break from previous
concepts about how speech and language work, and from

current approaches to speech technology, such as the ones
that we experience every day when we use Siri on our
iPhones. In order to represent such a resonant process, we
need to distinguish the external input rate from the internal rate at which resonance evolves. Because external
events may occur at variable rates, the internal processing
rate must have a !ner time scale than any detectable external rate. The internal rate must also be faster than the
resonance time scale that emerges as a result of bottom-up
and top-down interactions. Differential equations provide
a natural language for describing such a resonance because
their variables are parameterized by a fast enough “formal
time” scale to evolve moment-by-moment in response to
external and internal inputs that may arrive at arbitrary
times. Hopefully, when such resonant dynamics are incorporated into our iPhones, Siri’s descendants will be able
to rapidly and stably learn in more challenging acoustic
contexts.

From behavior to brain:
Autonomous adaptation
to a changing world
As part of my discovery of laws for STM, MTM, and LTM,
I also introduced a theoretical method model of discovery
and development that has led to more theoretical breakthroughs over the years than I could ever have imagined.
This method clari!es the proper level of description for
linking brain to mind, and operationalizes a sense in
which one cannot “derive the whole brain” in one step. Just
as biological evolution operated in stages over millennia,
this method embodies a theoretical cycle that carries out
a kind of conceptual evolution, leading to the discovery of
neural models that are capable of ever !ner levels of description of brain architecture and dynamics, along with
correspondingly deeper and broader explanatory and predictive ranges.
For me, it has been critical to begin with psychological data, typically scores or even hundreds of behavioral experiments in a particular problem domain, such
as vision, audition, cognitive information processing,
cognitive-emotional interactions, or sensory-motor control. One begins with behavioral data because brain evolution needs to achieve behavioral success. One works
with large amounts of data because otherwise too many
seemingly plausible, but incorrect, hypotheses about how
the brain works cannot be ruled out. The great thing about
starting with behavioral data is that, in many !elds of psychology, tons of such data have been reported and replicated during the past century. The full corpus of psychological data represents one of the largest databases of any
science. Although any good theorist can probably suggest

How a Brain Makes a Mind

multiple explanations of a few facts, trying to !nd even one
principled explanation of the data from hundreds of experiments is a very challenging task, and one that has led
me to make many surprising discoveries.
One also needs to incorporate the key fact that our
minds can adapt on their own to changing environmental
conditions, even if they are not told that or how these conditions have changed. One thus needs to frontally attack
the problem of how an individual autonomously adapts
in real time to a changing world that is filled with unexpected events. Knowing how to do this is currently an art
form. There are no algorithms at present that can assure
success in this endeavor. It requires that one be able to
translate piles of static data curves into hypotheses about
an underlying mental process that is evolving continuously in time within each individual mind. Doing this well
requires that one develops intuition into the functional
meaning that is hidden in these piles of static data curves,
and have enough modeling training to express one’s intuitions with appropriate mathematical concepts and equations. How to do this is one of the most important things
that I tried to teach to my PhD students and postdoctoral
fellows. I will describe this theoretical method in more
detail later in this chapter.

Why does the brain use
neural networks
Whenever I have carried out an analysis of how an individual’s behavior autonomously adapts to a changing world,
no matter what faculty of intelligence was being analyzed,
I have always been led to a model that looks like part of a
brain or, more exactly, like a neural network, or network
of interacting neurons. When this !rst happened to me in
1957, I knew no neuroscience. My !rst neural network naturally grew out of an analysis of psychological data about
how humans do verbal learning, notably how individuals learn lists of words or other lexical items by practicing
them multiple times, and then recall them one item at a
time later on. This is a kind of data that forces you to think
about what is happening through time.
It was only when I talked to some premedical student
friends of mine, who were studying neuroscience, that I
began to realize that my psychological analysis of learning
dynamics had managed to derive basic properties of the
brain. Processes that my friends were learning about in
their neuroscience studies—including nerve cell bodies,
the axons along which signals travel between neurons, the
synaptic knobs at the ends of the axons, the chemical transmitters that are produced in the synaptic knobs and released by them in response to axonal signals, the synapses
into which the chemical transmitters are released before

|

57

they activate the next nerve cell body, and the cell body potentials whereby neurons get activated or inhibited by their
inputs from these synapses (Figure 2.3)—were already represented in my behaviorally-derived neural network! I had
used psychological data to derive the basic facts about the
Neuron Doctrine, without having known anything about
this Doctrine. This realization was incredibly exciting to
me, and illustrated the power of this theoretical method.
Having linked mind to brain, I began to voraciously read
everything that I could get my hands on about neuroscience. The experience of deriving new insights about the
brain by studying the mind has repeated itself scores of
times over the years. I like to say that, whereas I am known
as one of the fathers of the !eld of neural networks, I have
never tried to derive a neural network!
Although these behaviorally-derived neural networks
have always included known brain mechanisms, the functional meaning of these brain mechanisms has often been
surprising, because the psychological analyses whereby
they were derived included new insights about their emergent properties. Behaviorally-derived neural networks
have also often predicted the existence of unknown psychological and neural data, and scores of these predictions
have been supported by subsequent psychological, neurophysiological, anatomical, and even biochemical experiments from !ve to thirty years after the predictions were
made. This theoretical method is thus emphatically not
just a way to !t known data.
In summary, there is a succinct answer to the basic
question: Why does a brain look the way that it does? The
answer seems to be this:
Brains look the way they do to be able to achieve autonomous adaptation in real time of individual behavior
to a changing world that is filled with unexpected events.
In other words, brain networks de!ne a natural computational embodiment of design principles whereby individuals can adapt on their own to a changing world,
and this is why brain anatomies look the way that they do.
Models of such brain networks naturally incorporate the
types of nonlinear, nonlocal, and nonstationary processes
that scientists like Helmholtz, Maxwell, and Mach had already begun to realize are essential.

FIGURE 2.3. Some basic anatomical and physiological properties of individual neurons. See the text for additional discussion.

58

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

First love: Serial learning,
events that go “backwards
in time”, and the middle is
a muddle
When I took Introductory Psychology in 1957, I studied
data about human verbal learning and animal discrimination learning, among other topics. To me, these data
were !lled with philosophical paradoxes that I found very
exciting.
For example, data about serial verbal learning in
humans (Figure 2.4) seemed to suggest that events can go
“backwards in time”. I was therefore forced to ask: What is
time? Why does it always seem to proceed from the past to
the future. Or does it? These data also directed me to confront basic questions about what sort of spaces our minds
create in order to represent events that can go backwards
in time. Questions about space and time are also among
the most fundamental ones that great physicists have pondered over the centuries, notably Newton and Einstein.
They also arise ubiquitously in psychological data.
A serial learning experiment is often run by presenting subjects with a list of items. The subjects’ task is, in response to a currently seen item, to guess the next item in a
list, before showing that item, and then asking the subject
what item follows that item, and so on until the entire list
is presented. This is called the serial anticipation method.
Then the list is repeated and practiced again until a criterion for learning the entire list is reached, such as being
able to correctly guess all the next items twice throughout
the list. The serial anticipation method is thus just a way to
analyze how Practice Makes Perfect.

FIGURE 2.4. Serial learning paradigm: Learning the temporal
order of events by practicing them in the order that they occur
in time.

The rate with which the items are presented within the
list is called the intra-trial interval, and the rest interval
between successive list presentations is called the intertrial interval (Figure 2.4). Varying each of these rates can
cause major changes in the speed of learning and in the
distribution of errors that are made while learning.
The simplest case occurs when learning a short list AB.
Remarkably, one then also learns to perform the reverse
list BA with higher probability. This property is called
“backward learning” and it is sometimes said to illustrate
“symmetry of associations”. However, this is far from the
whole story, since we all know that if C later occurs, the
longer list ABC can easily be learned. To understand this
simple fact of life actually confronts us with both a scienti!c and a philosophical problem. In particular, suppose
that the intra-trial interval between A and B, and between
B and C, is duration w. To further !x ideas, suppose that
w is chosen between 1 to 4 seconds in duration. After B
occurs, but before C occurs, the subject experiences just
the list AB for a duration of w seconds before C occurs, so
backward associations should start to form from B to A
during that time interval.
Despite this initial learning, somehow, after C is also
presented, the learned “forward” association from B to C
becomes stronger than the “backward” association from
B to A, so that the list ABC can be learned. Symmetry
of associations clearly no longer holds when we learn
longer lists! Rather, it seems that forward associations are
stronger than backward associations so that the “global
arrow in time” of the list ABC can be learned from past to
future. Why is this? What sort of spatial and temporal interactions can make this happen? Remarkably, this is just
the kind of thing that naturally happens if the events A, B,
and C activate their own item categories within a neural
network!
Before going further, let us immediately acknowledge
that such results demand an explanation using differential
equations in which events that occur at different moments
through time, such as A, then B, and then C, can dramatically change learning outcomes.
Further evidence that a neural network is behind this
“asymmetry between the future and the past” is a classical
piece of data that is called the bowed serial position curve.
The bowed serial position curve obtains when a longer list
is presented again and again on multiple learning trials
until a learning criterion for the entire list is reached.
One then plots the cumulative number of errors, summed
across all the learning trials, against list position, and !nds
the kind of error curves that are qualitatively summarized
in Figure 2.5. Figure 2.5 redraws data curves from a series
of classical experiments that the great American psychologist Carl Hovland published in 1938 (Hovland, 1938a,
1938b, 1938c). Here the short intra-trial interval is two
seconds long and the longer intra-trial interval is four seconds long, whereas the short inter-trial interval W is six

How a Brain Makes a Mind

FIGURE 2.5. Bowed serial position curve. This kind of data
emphasizes the importance of modeling how our brains give rise
to our minds using nonlinear systems of di!erential equations.

seconds long and the long inter-trial interval W equals two
minutes and six seconds long. Intuitively, the list is presented either quickly or slowly, followed by a little rest or a
lot of rest before it is presented again. Hovland used these
different intra-trial and inter-trial intervals in list learning
experiments with different groups of subjects.
The error curves in Figure 2.5 are said to be “bowed”
because the beginning and the end of a list are learned and
remembered more easily than the middle. This property is
characteristic of many life experiences that unfold as sequences of events through time. It is often the case that
we can better remember how they began and ended than
what happened in between. The middle is a muddle! I like
to give the example of a torrential love affair whose beginning and end are vividly remembered, but a lot of details
in between can seem to be a blur. The bowed serial position
curve is, moreover, asymmetric, with the most errors occurring at list positions nearer to the end than the beginning of the list. When I !rst studied these data in 1957, I
wondered if the asymmetric bowed error curve could also
arise from the asymmetry between the strength of future
and past associations, such as BC vs BA.

|

59

learning all past items in the list. This is thus a massive
“backward effect in time”. To better understand why this
is so, imagine a situation where the entire list is presented
with an intra-trial interval of w and an inter-trial interval
of W = w. For example, if the list is the alphabet A, B, C, . . . ,
X, Y, Z, turn on a masking stimulus w time units after Z is
presented. Design the masking stimulus to interfere with
further processing of the alphabet. Repeat this procedure
on multiple learning trials, and then test how many errors
occur at each list position.
If the mask succeeds in interfering with further processing of the alphabet on each learning trial, then there
should be an increasing number of errors at later list positions, as illustrated in the top curve of 2.6. The increase
of errors with list position can be attributed to associative
interference from the list items that occurred before each
tested list position. More errors would occur at the latest
positions in the list because the occurrence of more earlier
items could cause more associative interference. In particular, the most errors should occur at the end of the list.
Another way of saying this is that a monotonically increasing error curve is what we would expect if only the past
influenced the future.
However, if W is larger than w, and no masking stimulus is presented between learning trials, then a bowed
error curve will obtain, as illustrated by the bottom curve
of Figure 2.6, and as it does in all the data curves in Figure
2.5. In effect, letting W become larger than w defines Z
as the last item in the list due to the non-occurrence of
any letter after Z between the time that the intra-trial interval is exceeded and the next learning trial begins. This
fact again argues for differential equations to represent
the passage of time so that, after the non-occurrence of a
letter after Z, the brain’s internal dynamics can continue

Asymmetry between
past and future: How the
occurrence of “nothing”
in uences learning
It is important to realize that these bows imply that the
non-occurrence of future items influences the difficulty of

FIGURE 2.6. The bowed serial position curve illustrates the
sense in which “events can go backwards in time” during serial
learning.

60

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

to influence the ease of learning at earlier positions in
the list.
The importance of associative interference between
items can be highlighted by contrasting learning with
short vs. long intra-trial intervals w, and short vs. long
inter-trial intervals W, as Hovland did. If the list is presented quickly (w = two seconds), then a lot of associative
interference can occur because the activations, or STM
traces, that are caused by many previously occurring items
can simultaneously remain active. If there is also a short
rest period (W = six seconds), as in the red curve in Figure
2.5, then there is not enough time for this interference to
subside between successive list presentations, so there are
more errors at all list positions than in any other condition, but many more errors near the list middle.
If the list is presented quickly (w = two seconds) but
with a long rest period (W = two minutes and six seconds),
as in the green curve, then there is enough time between
successive list presentations for interference to subside. As
a result, errors in the list middle collapse the most, and
errors are fewer at all list positions.
If the list is presented more slowly (w = four seconds),
then fewer STM traces of previously presented items are
simultaneously active, so there are fewer errors at all list
positions, as the blue and purple curves illustrate. Thus,
if the items are presented slowly enough, increasing the
inter-trial interval has a smaller effect on reducing errors
at all list positions.
Position-speci!c error gradients in performance also
illustrate “backwards in time” dynamics (Figure 2.7).
Testing an item at the list beginning tends to cause recall
errors of items later in the list, with fewer errors made for
items further from the list beginning. Such errors, taken
together, are called an anticipatory error gradient. In
contrast, testing an item near the list end tends to cause

FIGURE 2.7. Position-specific forward and backward error gradients illustrate how associations can form in both the forward
and backward directions in time before the list is completely
learned.

recall errors of items earlier in the list, again with fewer
errors made for items much earlier in the list. Such errors,
taken together, are called a perseverative error gradient.
Presenting items near the list middle combines both types
of gradients, with more anticipatory errors than perseverative errors, thereby creating a bowed error gradient. The
error gradients near the middle of the list thus, once again,
reflect the “asymmetry between past and future”.
How do both forward and backward learning occur?
How can the non-occurrence of future items influence the
past? Serial learning data hereby raise a number of basic
problems that need to be solved to better understand all
phenomena about serial order in behavior, whether we are
thinking about language, motor skills, or spatial navigation in a complex environment. I gradually realized that
a solution required a real-time theory using differential
equations that could describe how learning changes LTM
values through time as the number and distribution of
STM traces change in response to different list presentation conditions.

What is the functional
stimulus: Items or se uence
chunks
Before moving forward, I hasten to note that backward effects in time are just one of many intellectual challenges
that serial learning data force upon us. Indeed, one of the
main issues in serial learning is: What is the functional
stimulus? This issue is illustrated by the fact that transfer of
learning from serial learning to paired associate learning is
much worse than from paired associate to serial learning.
Unlike serial learning, where the same item order is repeated over and over again on successive learning trials,
during paired associate learning, individual stimulusresponse pairs can be presented in any order on successive
learning trials. For example, on a given trial, the item pairs
AB, CD, EF, . . . may be presented in that temporal order,
but on the next trial the same pairs may be presented again,
but in a different temporal order EF, CD, AB, . . . , with the
recall task being to predict the second item in each pair
after seeing the !rst one (e.g., B given A), and doing so
before the second item is also presented. The asymmetric
transfer occurs when the paired associate pairs are also
successive items in the serial list. Asymmetric transfer
means that some prior paired associate learning improves
the learning of a compatible serial list much more than the
converse.
Many scientists from the 1930s through the 1960s
struggled with these transfer data, which imply that the
functional stimulus in serial learning is not the individual
items of the list. But then, what is the functional stimulus?!

How a Brain Makes a Mind

|

61

I gradually realized how sequences of items
that are stored in a working memory can be unitized into learned list chunks during serial learning
(Figures 1.23 and 1.24). This can happen because
the same list order is repeated over and over.
These list chunks are the functional units that
predict the next item in a serially learned list, not
the individual items that are presented by the experimentalist. In order to make this hypothesis
precise, I had to jump into cognitive studies to
discover how working memories are designed,
and how list chunks are learned from them. My
neural models eventually showed how to design
cognitive Item-Order-Rank working memories
and the Masking Field list chunk learning networks with which they interact, as the discussion
in Chapter 1 has illustrated. Chapter 12 will explain how these working memories are designed
and list chunks are learned from them, as well as FIGURE 2.8. The existence of forward and backward associations, such as
how these core ingredients help to explain and from A to B and from B to A is naturally explained by a network of neurons
predict a breathtaking amount of data about au- with their own activities or STM traces, and bidirectional connections bedition, speech, language, cognition, and sensory- tween them with their own adaptive weights or LTM traces.
motor control. My !rst article about neural
models of working memory and list chunks was
decaying back to zero. Because of this persistence, the acpublished in 1978, However, in 1957 I was worried about
tivities were also called short-term memory (STM) traces.
much simpler problems.
I could then see how the simultaneous persistence of STM

From serial learning
to neural networks:
Discovering the dynamics
of STM and LTM
These data about forward and backward learning, the bowed
serial position curve, and position-dependent error gradients
forced me into a neural network formalism (Figure 2.8), In
such a network, activities of cells code for recently occurring
events. In the case of learning the list AB, cells coding A and
then B would be activated. In particular, when list items like
A and B are presented, inputs to the corresponding cells turn
on their activities, or STM traces. That is why these cells are
said to be content-addressable. A major challenge for me, and
other cognitive scientists, was to explain how such contentaddressable item categories are learned. I will explain this in
Chapters 5 and 9, starting with discoveries that I began to
publish in 1976. In 1957, however, I could only assume that
these item categories exist, and hope to explain how they are
learned sometime in the future.
After receiving an input, an item category’s activity
would persist for awhile, even after its input shut off, before

traces across multiple item categories could cause the associative learning and interference that leads to the bowed
serial error curve.
The STM variables are different from more slowly
varying learning variables, which are also called longterm memory (LTM) traces, or adaptive weights. Due
to the network connections, there can be different LTM
traces to code for the lists AB and BA. These are the variables z AB and zBA, respectively, in Figure 2.8. Thus, a network geometry with distinct, and directed, connections
from A to B, and from B to A, with different LTM traces at
the synapse of each connection, made backward learning
easy to understand, at least qualitatively, because these
associations can both be learned when the item categories of A and B are simultaneously active. More generally,
the dynamically changing spatial pattern of all the STM
trace activities through time drove the learning of the
LTM traces, and was, in turn, altered by the read-out of
these LTM traces through time, in response to different
sequences of inputs to the network. Although I could intuitively see how these interacting STM and LTM traces
could explain the list learning data, the trick was to !nd
the correct STM and LTM laws to actually do it! I was able
to do this in 1957-58, and variants of these laws are still
used ubiquitously today to explain many different kinds
of psychological and neurobiological data about human
and animal learning.

62

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Dissociating STM
and LTM: Bilateral
hippocampectomy in HM

On the shoulders of giants:
The functional units of STM
and LTM are spatial patterns

The distinction between STM and LTM should not be
taken for granted. Due to the strong interactions between
these distinct processes, they can be confused or lumped
together. This kind of uncertainty was especially true
when I derived my laws for these processes in 1957. To
remind us of how very long ago this was, in the same year,
1957, William Scoville and Brenda Milner published their
landmark paper about the effects on learning and memory
of bilaterally removing the hippocampus, and adjacent
structures (Scoville and Milner, 1957). The effects of this
ablation illustrated that properties of STM and LTM could
be dissociated.
This surgery was carried out in an effort to control
intractable epilepsy in the patient who was called HM
to protect his privacy. HM was revealed to be Henry
Molaison after his death in 2008 at the age of 82. His
surgery was done in 1952, when Henry was 27 years old.
Henry retained many cognitive functions after his surgery, but had severe de!cits in committing to LTM new
explicit and conscious memories of experienced events,
memories that are often lumped together as declarative
memory. Although Henry could store recent events in
STM, if he was distracted, all trace of these events could
be abolished. For example, one could be introduced to
Henry, and receive his warm welcome, leave the room,
and come in to be introduced again with Henry none
the wiser.
Despite Henry’s profound declarative memory de!cits, his procedural memory for learning and remembering motor skills remained intact, even though he had no
conscious recollection of having practiced the skill. Many
scientists interviewed and tested Henry over the years to
better understand how the hippocampus contributes to
learning and memory. The Scoville and Milner article
also triggered thousands of additional clinical and experimental studies on multiple humans and animals to
better understand how learning and memory work, and
many of the resulting de!cits can currently be mechanistically explained by the cognitive and cognitiveemotional interactions in Adaptive Resonance Theory.
In particular, the different properties of declarative and
procedural memories illustrate the brain’s organization
into computationally complementary cortical processing streams (Table 1.1). Several subsequent chapters will
be devoted to explaining how these different processes
work, and how they break down in amnesic individuals
like HM.

Learning at the model’s synapses was part of a time-honored
tradition of associative learning by many great psychologists, including Ivan Pavlov (Pavlov, 1927), Donald Hebb
(Hebb, 1949), Clark Hull (Hull, 1943), Edward Thorndike
(Thorndike, 1927), B. F. Skinner (Skinner, 1938), Edward
Tolman (Tolman, 1948), and William Estes (Estes, 1950).
However, how learning works in my STM-LTM model
went beyond the concepts of these great scientists.
That is true because my conceptual and mathematical
analyses of these networks in the 1960s showed that the
functional units of learning are distributed patterns, or vectors, of LTM traces across a network, not individual traces
between a particular pair of cells; e.g., Grossberg (1968c).
Indeed, analysis of such patterns in the case of serial
learning enabled me to understand data like the bowed
serial position curve; e.g., Grossberg (1969c). In order for
a pattern of LTM traces to match, through learning, a pattern of STM traces, some of the LTM traces may need to
increase, while others need to decrease. Thus, my LTM laws
combined what some scientists would later call Hebbian
(increasing LTM strength) and anti-Hebbian (decreasing
LTM strength) properties. In other words, an LTM trace
increases (Hebbian) as it learns to match a large STM activity, or decreases (anti-Hebbian) as it learns to match a
small STM activity.
This conclusion contradicts the famous Hebb Postulate
that practice always strengthens associations. Hebb wrote
in 1949 that “when the axon of cell A is near enough to
excite a cell B . . . A’s efficacy, as one of the cells !ring B is
increased” (Hebb, 1949). Despite its great constructive effects on the research of many scientists, the Hebb Postulate
is wrong, and it is wrong for a fundamental reason: Hebb
chose the wrong computational unit. The unit is not a
single pathway. Instead, the unit of LTM is a pattern of
LTM traces that is distributed across a network. When one
needs to match an LTM pattern to an STM pattern, then
both increases and decreases of LTM strength are needed.
The Hebb postulate fails for a basic reason that does
not depend upon this insight: If in fact an LTM trace
could only increase, and if all LTM traces have a !nite
upper bound, then there could come a time when an LTM
trace reached its maximum value. After that time, further
learning with that LTM trace would be impossible, even if
the world changed.
This problem does not occur with the LTM laws that
I introduced, because my LTM traces can increase or
decrease as changing environmental demands require.

How a Brain Makes a Mind

|

63

I was !rst led to this conclusion by analyzing how learning
of a spatial pattern stay constant through time, even if
occurs at different list positions to explain serial learning
their total activities oscillate together. This result led me to
data. I called the learning law that could explain these data
predictions about synchronous dynamics in the mid-1970s
gated steepest descent learning. During gated steepest dethat influenced the experimental work of neurophysioloscent learning, an LTM trace (e.g., zAB in Figure 2.8) tracks
gists like Charles Gray and Wolf Singer (Gray and Singer,
and approaches the value of a post-synaptic STM signal
1989) and Reinhard Eckhorn and his colleagues (Eckhorn
(e.g., x B in Figure 2.8) through time (steepest descent).
et al., 1988) in the 1980s.
Learning only occurs when a pre-synaptic STM “samIn this way, I derived, during my Freshman year at
pling” signal (e.g., x A in Figure 2.8 is active enough, and
Dartmouth in 1957-58, the paradigm of using systems of
thereby opens a learning “gate” that enables steepest denonlinear differential equations to describe neural netscent to occur. Gated steepest descent learning also proved
works whose STM and LTM interactions explain and preto be invaluable to explain many other kinds of learning
dict quite a bit of psychological and neurobiological data.
as well, including the bottom-up learning that tunes the
I called the simplest versions of this model the Additive
adaptive !lters that choose recognition categories and the
Model and the Shunting Model.
top-down learning of expectations that select the critical
The Additive Model got its name from the fact that
feature patterns upon which attention is focused (Figures
each cell’s activity is the result of influences that add
1.25 and 2.2). These processes are explained in Chapter 5 as
their effects on its rate of change. Figure 2.9 describes the
part of the competitive learning, self-organizing map, and
Additive Model equation and de!nes its various terms,
ART models. The fact that LTM traces in the brain exhibit
including the decay rate of the activity xi, the sum of all
gated steepest descent properties started to be con!rmed
positive and negative feedback signals from other cells,
experimentally by neurophysiologists like Wolf Singer and
and any external inputs from the world. Understanding of
William (“Chip”) Levy 20 years later (Levy, Brassel, and
the book does not, however, depend upon knowing this or
Moore, 1983; Levy and Desmond, 1985; Rauschecker and
other equations that I will occasionally mention.
Singer, 1979; Singer, 1983).
Additive responses to arbitrarily large inputs can lead
Despite the fact that the Hebb postulate cannot posto activities that have no upper or lower bounds, since
sibly be the whole truth, and that learning laws like gated
every increment in an input can cause a proportional insteepest descent !t behavioral and neurobiological data
crement in the resulting activity. But all cells have !xed,
better, many psychologists and neuroscientists continue to
indeed small, bounds on their activities. This is a basic
invoke the term “Hebbian learning” to describe any exproperty of all cells, whether they are in your brain or
ample of associative learning. Some may wish to do this to
your kidney: In!nity does not exist in biology! I therefore
honor Hebb’s many contributions to memory research, dealso introduced the Shunting Model, of which the Additive
spite the fact that his hypothesis about how learning works
Model is a special case. The Shunting Model keeps cell acwas wrong. On the other hand, Hebb was not the !rst, or
tivities within !xed upper and lower bounds (Figure 2.10)
even the greatest, pioneer of memory research. There were
using what are called automatic gain control terms (red
other greats before him or as his contemporaries.
We should not overlook the seminal contributions of memory researchers such as Pavlov, Hull,
Thorndike, Skinner, Tolman, and Estes, among
others. My own preference is to be clear about the
speci!c hypotheses in different learning laws and
their historical origins, and to give them functional names, like gated steepest descent, that reflect how they work. Only in this way can one
avoid confusion about different learning properties and build upon previous discoveries in an ef!cient and rational way.
My mathematical analyses in the mid-1960s
to early 1970s proved that the LTM traces learn a
time average of the spatial patterns of STM traces
that are active when the sampling signal is on. As
Chapter 5 will explain, these LTM traces encode
the relative activities of the STM traces that characterize the spatial patterns. Said in another way,
the LTM traces learn the synchronous part of FIGURE 2.9. The Additive Model describes how multiple e!ects add up inthese STM patterns, since the relative activities fluence the activities, or STM, traces of neurons.

64

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 2.10. The Shunting Model includes upper and lower
bounds on neuronal activities. These bounds have the e!ect of
multiplying additive terms by excitatory and inhibitory automatic
gain terms that enable such models to preserve their sensitivity
to inputs whose size may vary greatly in size through time, while
also approximately normalizing their total activities.

terms in Figure 2.10) that play many useful roles in brain
dynamics. The Shunting Model embodies the membrane
equations of neurophysiology, which describe how cell
potentials respond to their inputs (Hodgkin and Huxley,
1952). At the time in 1957 that I derived it from psychological considerations, I did not yet know any neurophysiology. Variants of the Additive and Shunting models are
used today by essentially all biological modelers in computational neuroscience.
With the Additive and Shunting STM equations before
us, it is now easy to also write down the simplest versions
of the medium-term memory, or MTM, law which is realized by a habituative transmitter gate; and the long-term
memory, or LTM law which is realized by gated steepest
descent learning (Figure 2.11). MTM changes more slowly
than STM, and LTM changes even more slowly than MTM.
The MTM law in Figure 2.11 is called a transmitter gate because it multiplies signals that are activated by STM traces,
as illustrated by term D ji y ji z ji in Figure 2.10. It is called habituative because the release or inactivation of transmitter
by these signals, as in term −Lf k ( x k ) yki in Figure 2.11, reduces the efficacy of the signal pathway.
The LTM law in Figure 2.11 is called gated steepest descent because learning turns on when the learning gate,
or sampling signal, f k ( x k ) is positive, thereby enabling the
adaptive weight, or LTM trace, z ki to approach the sampled
signal hi ( xi ) by steepest descent via term (hi ( xi ) − z ki ). When
the learning gate shuts off, learning stops, and the adaptive
weight can remember what it has learned until it turns on
again, which might not happen for a long time. LTM also
gates the readout of signals, as term D ji y ji z ji in Figure 2.10
again illustrates.

FIGURE 2.11. Medium-term memory (MTM) and long-term
memory (LTM) equations complement the Additive and Shunting
Models of STM. MTM is typically defined by a chemical transmitter that is released from the synaptic knobs of a neuron (Figure
2.3). Its release or inactivation in an activity- dependent way is
also called habituation. LTM defines how associative learning occurs between a pair of neurons whose activities are appropriately
correlated through time. See the text for details.

All of these equations were needed, for example, to
de!ne the gated dipole opponent processing circuits in
Figures 2.8 and 2.9, and their variations and specializations have enabled the explanation and prediction of a vast
number and variety of psychological and neurobiological
data. One reason, therefore, for summarizing these equations here, even without a mathematical analysis of them,
is to illustrate that in the psychological and brain sciences,
no less than the physical sciences, a small number of fundamental equations can explain and predict many important and interesting data.

Three sources of neural
network research:
Binary, linear, and
continuous-nonlinear
My own work pioneered biological neural network models
capable of linking brains to minds, but this was certainly
not the only historical source of models that have been
used to explain aspects of how brains work. At least three
such sources should be noted (Figure 2.12):

Binary models
McCulloch-Pitts model and the digital computer.
Binary systems were inspired in part by neurophysiological observations showing that signals between many neurons are carried by all-or-none spikes. When the activity,

How a Brain Makes a Mind

|

65

University in 1956, which he called The Computer and the
Brain (von Neumann, 1958).
The McCulloch-Pitts model was not the only contribution to the binary model literature. Eduardo Caianiello
(Caianiello, 1961), working in Naples, Italy, used a binary
STM equation that also operated at discrete time steps
and whose activity was influenced by activities at multiple times in the past. The signals emitted by a Caianiello
neuron could be +1 if the activity was positive, or 0 if it was
not, so it eliminated the biologically implausible negative
signals of the McCulloch-Pitts model.

FIGURE 2.12. Three sources of neural network research: Binary,
linear, and continuous and nonlinear. My own work has contributed primarily to the third.

or potential, of a neuron exceeds a !ring threshold, then a
spike can be generated and can travel, without decrement,
down the axon of the neuron for long distances (Figure
2.3). Spikes may be triggered more frequently as the cell
activity increases, so that increasingly active cells can emit
spikes with an ever higher frequency that can have an increasingly large impact on neurons that receive its signals.
The binary stream was initiated by a classical article
that was published in 1943 by Warren McCulloch and
Walter Pitts when they were working at MIT (McCulloch
and Pitts, 1943). Their model describes a threshold logic
system. The activities, or STM traces, xi of the ith node
in such a network interact in discrete time according to
the equation in the upper left panel of Figure 2.12. In this
equation, the signum function, denoted by sgn, can take
on the values +1 if w > 0, 0 if w = 0, and –1 if w < 0. In
particular, a cell generates a binary signal, or spike, with
amplitude +1 if the activity is positive. The negative signal
–1 when the activity is negative has no analog in neuronal
signaling, however. Its role in the McCulloch-Pitts model
was to enable the computation of useful logical operations,
as indicated by the arresting title of their article: “A Logical
Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity”. The
model’s goal was thus to demonstrate how complex logical operations could be computed just by using suitable
combinations of +1, 0, and –1 signals between multiple elements in a computing network.
The McCulloch-Pitts model had an influence far
beyond the !eld of neural networks. One of its most enduring influences was upon John Von Neumann, one of the
greatest mathematicians of the twentieth century, when he
was at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, developing the digital computer that has totally revolutionized our lives. This influence is illustrated by a famous
series of Silliman Lectures that Von Neumann gave at Yale

Perceptron. In 1958, Frank Rosenblatt, who worked at
the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory before he became a
professor at Cornell University, introduced a STM equation that evolves in continuous time, whose activities can
spontaneously decay, and which can generate binary signals above a non-zero threshold. Rosenblatt’s equation was
used in his classical Perceptron model (Rosenblatt, 1958),
which is a linear classi!er that can learn to separate input
vectors, and thereby classify them as being in different categories (e.g., cat vs. dog), if they are linearly separable.
Both Caianiello and Rosenblatt were interested in
learning, and both introduced equations to change the
adaptive weights, or LTM traces, in their equations through
learning. However, in both models, interactions between
STM and LTM were uncoupled in order to simplify the
analysis: First there would be a change in STM, then the algorithm would allow LTM to adjust to it, and then the cycle
would repeat. This meant that these models did not operate
autonomously in real time, where both STM and LTM would
adjust to changing contingencies as they occurred. These
LTM equations also had a digital aspect. The Caianiello LTM
equations increased or decreased at constant rates until they
hit !nite upper or lower bounds.
From Perceptrons to Back Propagation and Deep
Learning. I had the pleasure of knowing both Caianiello
and Rosenblatt. Frank Rosenblatt died tragically in a
boating accident when he was only 43 years old. His pioneering work is having a major impact even today. His ambitious goals are illustrated by the fact that he followed his
1958 article about the Perceptron model with a classical
1962 book called Principles of Neurodynamics (Rosenblatt,
1962). Although the original Perceptron model had only an
input layer and output layer of neurons with which to classify linearly separable patterns into two categories, Frank
realized that classi!ers with more layers were needed, and
introduced the name “back propagation” to describe how
the adaptive weights in such an expanded network would
be trained. He did not, however, translate this heuristic insight into a computationally competent back propagation
algorithm.
Variants of the back propagation model were introduced independently by several authors, including

66

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Shun-Ichi Amari in 1972 in Japan (Amari, 1972), Paul
Werbos in 1974 as part of his PhD thesis at Harvard
University (Werbos, 1974, 1994), and David Parker in
1982 in California (Parker, 1982, 1985, 1986, 1987). Paul
Werbos seems to be the !rst person to have published
the algorithm in its modern form and use it successfully
in applications. Back propagation !nally became popular
in response to an oft-cited article by David Rumelhart,
Geoffrey Hinton, and Ronald Williams that was published
in 1986 (Rumelhart, Hinton, and Williams, 1986). Their
1986 article has often been incorrectly cited as the source
of the algorithm by people who are unaware of its history.
Technically, back propagation uses an old idea in
mathematics, steepest or gradient descent, that goes back
at least to Carl Friedrich Gauss (Gauss, 1814), who lived
in Germany between 1777-1855 and was one of the greatest mathematicians who ever lived. Steepest descent works
by attracting adaptive weights to target values during
learning trials. In back propagation, the learned weights,
or LTM traces, need to be transported from where they are
learned to where they are needed to !lter incoming data.
That is, the LTM traces are computed at one location in the
algorithm and their learned values are then moved algorithmically to another location. One can think of this as a
physical, not just a functional, separation of learning and
recall. Such a non-local transport of weights has no analog
in our brains.
Back propagation became very popular for awhile, and
helped to develop some useful applications. However, its
conceptual and practical limitations were soon realized
by practitioners. As I earlier remarked in the Preface, my
1988 article in the inaugural issue of the journal Neural
Networks (Grossberg, 1988) listed 17 major limitations of
learning by back propagation that were not problems for
Adaptive Resonance Theory. After this period of cooling
down, during the past decade, Hinton and his colleagues
vigorously applied and developed the variant of back propagation that is called Deep Learning (e.g., Hinton et al.,
2012; LeCun, Bengio, and Hinton, 2015). They were able
to achieve useful results in multiple applications by exploiting the huge databases that have emerged with the
World Wide Web (e.g., millions of pictures of cats on the
World Wide Web), and the incredibly fast computer networks that have evolved at the same time. Deep Learning
has typically derived these results by carrying out slow
learning (meaning that adaptive weights change very little
on each learning trial) using many supervised learning
trials of large numbers of exemplars from huge databases.
Many scientists have become excited by the promise of
Deep Learning, even while acknowledging problems such
as catastrophic forgetting and poor generalization (Bengio
and LeCun, 2007).
Even if Deep Learning generalizes well in response to a
subset of data, it cannot easily be determined whether the
knowledge that has been embodied in its adaptive weights

reflect an understanding of the environment that it is predicting. This problem is called the Explainable AI problem,
and is a subject of current intense interest in the AI community (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Explainable_arti!cial_intelligence). Also see Grossberg (2020a).
Variants of Deep Learning have been developed to at
least partially overcome these problems, including using
unsupervised pre-training before supervised !ne-tuning
(Erhan et al., 2010). These and other applications of Deep
Learning have driven a renaissance in AI that has brought
improved products into our everyday lives, especially
applications that classify huge databases of images and
sounds.
Despite these successes, Deep Learning, being a variant of back propagation, is emphatically not how our
brains work. Its architecture is not supported by brain
data, and it does not realize the kinds of general-purpose
and flexible capabilities that we associate with animal intelligence, including our own. As the Preface has already
noted, Hinton himself acknowledged this in a 2017 article
in the September 15, 2017 issue of Axios where he said that
he is “deeply suspicious” of back-propagation”, that “I suspect that means getting rid of back-propagation . . . I don’t
think it’s how the brain works. We clearly don’t need all
the labeled data . . .”, and that “my view is, throw it all away
and start over” (LeVine, 2017).
Actually, we do not need to “start over”. One just needs
to read the mainstream published literature in which,
over the past 50 years, many fundamental properties of
human intelligence have been steadily explained and rigorously modeled that Deep Learning cannot explain, including how to quickly learn to classify and predict huge
non-stationary databases without experiencing catastrophic forgetting. For example, variants of ART models
can, in fast learning mode, learn to classify a complete
database on a single learning trial, can do so without experiencing catastrophic forgetting, and its learning can
after every learning trial be interpreted in terms of fuzzy
IF-THEN rules.

Linear
ADELINE and MADELINE. Bernard Widrow at
Stanford University also drew inspiration from the brain
to introduce the gradient descent ADELINE adaptive
pattern recognition algorithm (Widrow, 1962). This algorithm uses a linear !lter with adaptive weights, or LTM
traces, that slowly converge to values which reduce the
least mean square of the error between a desired output
and the current output. Widrow’s models have been used
in many signal processing applications, including adaptive noise canceling in a wide variety of devices, including

How a Brain Makes a Mind

earphones, communication lines, and modems. These
algorithms also !nd echoes in back propagation, which
also learns by gradient descent using a least mean square
criterion.
Brain-State-in-a-Box. James Anderson at Brown
University described his intuitions about neural pattern
recognition by also adapting concepts from linear system
theory to represent some aspects of neural dynamics. The
activities in his model obey a linear equation. However,
each neuron’s output combines continuous and binary
properties: Although the outputs increase linearly with
cell activity within a given range of intermediate values,
they saturate at negative and positive constant values
in response to sufficiently small and large activities.
This output function is charmingly summarized by the
name of Anderson’s model, Brain-State-in-a-Box, or BSB
(Anderson, Silverstein, Ritz, and Jones, 1977). The BSB
model has been used in various pattern classi!cation applications. However, it has several conceptual problems, a
major one being that its activities can amplify, rather than
suppress, noise. I had, in fact, mathematically proved how
to solve this noise suppression problem in my 1973 article about “Contour Enhancement, Short-Term Memory,
and Constancies in Reverberating Neural Networks”
(Grossberg, 1973). I summarize in Figure 1.7 how signal
functions may be chosen to avoid noise ampli!cation.
From Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse to Self-Organizing
Maps. Teuvo Kohonen at Helsinki University also made
a transition from linear algebra concepts, such as the
Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse (e.g., Albert, 1972), to more
biologically motivated models that include nonlinear interactions. In the latter category, Kohonen used a simpli!ed version of a Self-Organizing Map, or SOM, model in
various applications (e.g., Kohonen, 1984). The SOM model
feeds the outputs of an adaptive !lter into a competition
that chooses a winning category, or small set of categories,
from the cells that receive the largest total inputs through
the adaptive !lter. These winning categories are used to
classify incoming data.
The SOM had earlier been introduced and developed
in the early 1970s by myself working in Cambridge and
Boston, and Christoph von der Malsburg, who was then
working at the Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry in Göttingen (Grossberg, 1972c, 1976a, 1976b;
Malsburg, 1973). I had even earlier introduced and mathematically analyzed the learning laws and competitive networks that go into the SOM model, starting in the 1960s
(e.g., Grossberg, 1968c, 1969c, 1971b, 1973, 1974).
I will explain how biological SOMs work in Chapter 5,
including how they can undergo catastrophic forgetting,
and how they solve the stability-plasticity dilemma, and
thus do not catastrophically forget, when they are suitably

|

67

embedded within larger Adaptive Resonance Theory, or
ART, neural architectures. Biological versions of SOMs include essential properties, such as Medium Term Memory,
or MTM, that the simpli!ed version of Kohonen does not.
These enhanced SOMs, and the larger ART architectures
in which they live, are used in a remarkably wide range
of brain processes, ranging from vision and speech to
cognitive-emotional interactions and spatial navigation.

Continuous-Nonlinear
Hartline-Ratliff equation for the horseshoe crab retina.
Continuous-nonlinear network laws typically arose from
an analysis of behavioral or brain data. Neurophysiological
experiments on the lateral eye of the Limulus, or horseshoe crab, led to the award of a Nobel Prize in Physiology
or Medicine in 1967 to H. Keffer Hartline, who had done
his work at The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research
in Manhattan. Hartline used to collect the crabs on Long
Island.
In addition to doing these important experiments,
Hartline also worked with Floyd Ratliff to model their
data (Hartline and Ratliff, 1957). This interdisciplinary research provided an inspiring prototype for how cuttingedge neurophysiological experimentation and theoretical
modeling could be mutually reinforcing. The original
Hartline-Ratliff model describes network activities at
steady-state in response to constant inputs. This model
shows how recurrent inhibition across cells can reduce the
net activities in the retina; cf. Figures 1.6 and 1.7. An inhibitory feedback signal is generated in the model when
the cell’s activity exceeds a !ring threshold.
The Hartline-Ratliff equation was generalized with
their collaborator William Miller to the Hartline-RatliffMiller model, which models the dynamics of recurrent
inhibition through time (Ratliff, Hartline, and Miller,
1963). Figure 2.13 describes how the model’s cell activities ei are transformed into smaller net activities hi
t

by the sum − ∑ j =1[ ∫ e − A(t −v )h j (v )dv − Γ j ]+ B ji of all the inn

0

hibitory feedback signals. Each inhibitory feedback signal
is itself a difference of two terms. The !rst term is a timeaverage, from the start time v = 0 to the present time v = t ,
of the net activity h j (v ) of the jth inhibitory cell as it exponentially decays through time at rate A. The second
term subtracts the !ring threshold Γ j from the average
activity to determine the inhibitory feedback signal. The
Hartline-Ratliff-Miller model is thus a kind of continuous
threshold-logic system. This model is a precursor of the
Additive Model that that I had independently discovered
in 1957-58 (Figure 2.9).

68

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 2.13. Hartline’s lab developed a model to describe signal processing by the retina of the horseshoe crab.

Coincidentally, the year 1967 when Hartline won
the Nobel Prize was also the year that I earned my PhD
in mathematics from Rockefeller for a thesis that proved
global limit and oscillation theorems for the neural networks that I had discovered in 1957–58 (see below). My
neural networks included as a special case the HartlineRatliff-Miller model. I was able to prove these global limit
and oscillation theorems for networks with an arbitrarily
large number of neurons, which was an unusual kind of
theorem in applied mathematics. The theorems characterized all the trajectories of the STM and LTM traces of the
networks as they learned through time, and thus showed
how the networks function as content-addressable memories for storing learned patterns.
Hodgkin-Huxley equations for the squid giant axon.
Another classical contribution arose from the analysis of
how the excitable membrane of a single neuron can generate electrical spikes (the red curve in Figure 2.14) that are
capable of rapidly and non-decrementally traversing the
axon, or pathway, from one neuron’s cell body to a neuron
to which it is sending signals. This experimental work was
done on the squid giant axon because it was big enough to
allow the electrode to be placed inside it. Sir Alan Hodgkin
and Sir Andrew Huxley did these epochal experiments both
at the Physiological Laboratory in Cambridge, England,
and at the Laboratory of the Marine Biological Association
in Plymouth, Massachusetts (Hodgkin and Huxley, 1952).
I call the work epochal because it remains one of the most
important foundational neurophysiological studies that
has ever been done. Hodgkin and Huxley also introduced
the Hodgkin-Huxley model of nerve impulse propagation
to explain their data about how spikes are generated and
travel down an axon (Figure 2.14). Theirs was thus another
inspiring example of a highly successful interdisciplinary
experimental and modeling enterprise. Their work earned
them the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1963.

FIGURE 2.14. Hodgkin and Huxley developed a model to explain how spikes travel down the squid giant axon.

Despite its great importance and usefulness, the
Hodgkin-Huxley model was basically a curve !t to their
data from a single kind of cell. Later models and mathematical analyses, notably in a classical series of articles by
Gail Carpenter between 1976 and 1981, provided a more
robust mathematical de!nition of a generalized HodgkinHuxley model that included many biophysical variations
which could occur in different kinds of neurons, as well
as a mathematical analysis of how individual spikes are
generated in a wide variety of cells. Carpenter also proved
when and how periodic sequences and bursts of spikes
could occur under both normal and abnormal conditions
(Carpenter, 1976, 1977a, 1977b, 1979, 1981). These results
provided a deep geometrical insight into how and when
different spiking patterns are caused in large classes of
model neurons.
Since the Hodgkin-Huxley equation focuses on individual neurons rather than neural networks, it will not be
further discussed herein except to note that it provides a
historical context for the neural network Shunting Model
that I discovered in 1957-58 and !nally got published in
1967 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
(Grossberg, 1967; Figure 2.10).
Linking brain to mind: !e units that govern behavioral
success are distributed patterns. I hope that these historical comments give the reader a better idea of the stateof-the-art around the time that I introduced the paradigm
of using nonlinear neural networks to link brain mechanisms to psychological functions in 1957-1958. Despite the
fact that these laws are foundational and classical today,
it took a decade to get them published because they represented a major paradigm shift in how the psychological
and brain sciences were then being studied. This paradigm
shift is still ongoing today.

How a Brain Makes a Mind

As I have noted above, these discoveries were derived
from an analysis of how an individual learner adapts autonomously in real time. Because of the psychological origins of this discovery, and the fact that I was so young,
I did not at the time know anything about how brains work,
or about the contemporary work of Hodgkin and Huxley.
Once I realized, however, that my psychologically derived laws explained basic facts about brain dynamics and
learning, I leaped into the neurobiological literature with
an enthusiasm that has never abated. The ensuing models
aimed at explaining interdisciplinary experimental literatures highlighted profound differences between what I was
doing and the classical results on single neurons, as in the
work of Hodgkin and Huxley, or small networks of neurons, as in the work of Hartline and Ratliff. Instead, modeling of how an individual’s behavior adapts in real time
to a changing environment led to new functional insights
about how our brains look and function, including the
basic fact that the functional units that govern behavioral
success are distributed patterns on the network and system
levels, not single spikes, or sequences or bursts of spikes, in
individual neurons.

Why does the brain use
nonlinear multiple-scale
feedback networks
With these STM, MTM, and LTM equations in hand, I
can tell you more about what kind of differential equations
are needed to explain how a brain gives rise to a mind.
Essentially all of the known self-adapting behavioral and
brain systems are nonlinear feedback systems with large
numbers of components operating over multiple spatial and temporal scales. What do these words mean? As
I noted in my discussion of Helmholtz’s insights about
how we “discount the illuminant,” a linear system is one
in which the “whole is the sum of its parts.” In a linear
system, the effects of the parts on the whole are just added
or subtracted. A nonlinear system is one in which this is
not true. In particular, lots of the effects that occur in the
brain use multiplication or division. The class of all nonlinear systems is huge, and there are a very large number
of nonlinear systems that do not describe a brain. The task
of selecting appropriate nonlinear systems requires a sustained analysis of behavioral and brain data.
A feedforward system is one in which information flows
in only one direction: from the outside of the system progressively inward. As noted in my discussion in Chapter 1
of Helmholtz’s theory of unconscious inference, the brain
also needs to include feedback. In a feedback system, interactions occur in both directions, both to and from a given
neuron (Figure 2.2). In the case of phonemic restoration,

|

69

feedback enables an adaptive resonance to occur between
a working memory that stores a sequence of individual
events, and list categories that code whole sequences of
events (Figure 1.23). As noted earlier, this kind of feedback
is said to be top-down, from deeper in the brain towards
more peripheral processing stages.
Another kind of feedback can occur within a given
neural region, often among cells of a similar type. Such networks are often said to be recurrent (Figure 1.6). Feedback
can also occur between the brain and its environment, as
when we use an arm to move an object, while watching
the object move. The fact that multiple temporal scales are
needed is evident from the de!nitions of STM, MTM, and
LTM, with STM variables changing on a time scale of milliseconds, MTM variables changing on a time scale of tens
or hundreds of milliseconds, and LTM variables changing
on a time scale of from seconds to a lifetime. For example,
the process whereby we hear a new word using STM operates more quickly than the learning process whereby we
remember the word on a future occasion using LTM.
Multiple spatial scales are needed because the brain
needs to process object parts as well as wholes. For example, when we look at a face, we can see it as a whole, as
well as its various distinctive parts, such as the eyes, nose,
mouth, hair, and even small skin blemishes. Multiple scales
are also needed to categorize words of different length.
And so on. Multiple spatial scales can be de!ned using
the summation signs ∑ that combine all the signals
from other cells to a given cell. Each modal architecture
allows different numbers of cells to influence each other,
ranging from only nearby cells to widespread connections.
Masking Fields (Figures 1.23 and 1.24) show that a single
network level can contain multiple scales, in this instance
to be able to selectively categorize, or chunk, list sequences
of multiple lengths. Subsequent chapters, notably Chapters
8 on motion perception, Chapter 11 on form perception,
and Chapter 12 on speech perception, will illustrate how
multiple scales work with speci!c examples.
What about nonlinear feedback? The sums of excitatory and inhibitory signals are feedback signals because,
just as the kth cell activity xk can influence the ith cell activity xi with such a signal, the ith cell activity can often
reciprocally influence the kth cell activity in return. This
happens all the time, whether as schematized in the anatomical diagram of visual system connections in Figure
0.1, in backward learning in Figure 2.8, or in adaptive resonance in Figures 1.23, 1.24, and 2.2.
The STM, MTM, and LTM equations in Figures 2.9–
2.11 enable a more precise description of the kind of nonlinear feedback, and multiple spatial and temporal scales,
that our brains use. For example, wherever you see the
variables x (STM), y (MTM), or z (LTM) multiplied in
Figures 2.9–2.11, that is a nonlinear term. Consider the
shunting STM equation in Figure 2.10 for de!niteness.
All the product terms f(x)yz and g(x)YZ are nonlinear. As

70

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

I noted earlier in this chapter, these terms say that MTM
and LTM multiplicatively gate an STM signal f(x) between
cells before this net signal can influence the recipient cell.
The equations that these variables obey are the least nonlinear equations that can accomplish their various functional requirements.
These nonlinear feedback and multiple-scale properties are all easy to describe intuitively, but translating them
into workable systems, within the tough honesty of mathematics, has always been a big challenge. The hardest thing is
often to !gure out what problem the brain is trying to solve
and how it is going about it. For example, realizing that the
CLEARS mechanisms of Adaptive Resonance Theory are
related took many years of thought. This book can now be
written because, after intuition and mathematics successfully combine to discover new organizational principles
and mechanisms, the resulting insights can often be stated
as a simple story, without the mathematics. However, as I
noted above, a full understanding of why a result has the
properties that it does, along with a sense of its inevitability, does require that one study the underlying mathematical equations and derivations that reveal their implications. Fortunately, many basic conclusions can be proved
by using just high school mathematics. Deeper properties
sometimes require additional mathematics for their proof,
but one can go a long way with simple methods. In all cases,
mathematics provides the springboard from which we can
cross the bridge from individual neurons to the emergent
properties of large networks of interacting neurons that
map directly onto observable behaviors.

A gedanken experiment for
solving the noise-saturation
dilemma in cellular tissues
Cooperation and competition are universal in biology,
including in brain networks. I will now explain how the
brain solves the noise-saturation dilemma in order to illustrate how simple mathematics can rapidly lead to profound conclusions that would otherwise be very difficult to
understand. I will use a gedanken, or thought, experiment
to derive the simplest laws that realize this solution. Such
a gedanken experiment celebrates the triumph of pure
reason in science by showing how obvious hypotheses,
with which no one would disagree, together imply conclusions about deep properties of brain organization that required ingenious experiments to discover. One can think
of such a gedanken experiment as exposing some of the
evolutionary pressures that led to these properties of brain
organization.
The general theme that will be clari!ed by this particular gedanken experiment is why neurons cooperate and

compete. Cooperation and competition are well known
to occur in biology, one of whose classical cornerstones is
the transformative work of Charles Darwin, On the Origin
of Species by Means of Natural Selection in 1859 (Darwin,
1859), which explained how evolution may be shaped by
the competitive interactions that drive natural selection.
Darwin’s work focused on how competition can shape the
evolution of species. But why is competition ubiquitous on
the level of cells? The gedanken experiment provides an
answer that is just as important for non-neural cellular tissues as for brains.
What is a cell: Computing with cellular patterns. In
order to proceed, we !rst need to ask: What is a cell? A
sufficient answer to such a challenging question will not
be attempted in this book, and indeed is still a work in
progress throughout biology. However, I can immediately
state a necessary condition that holds for all cells, whatever else they may be: A cell has only finitely many excitable
sites that can be turned on or off by external or internal
inputs. This is just a special case of the claim that in!nity
does not exist in biology. This fact alone leads to enormous
conceptual pressure whereby to understand how competition must work in cells, indeed how to solve the noisesaturation dilemma that I summarized in Figure 1.5, if one
thinks about the problem in the right way. This solution, in
turn, provides a framework for discussing profound theoretical issues in a uni!ed way, notably the many-faceted
question: How do we reconcile the probabilistic nature of
the world with the fact that our behaviors can be carried
out with deterministic precision?
I will combine this simple constraint on the de!nition of a cell with the fact that, in order to bridge between
brain mechanisms and mental functions, one must study
distributed patterns of activation across a network of cells,
rather than the activity of an individual cell. This can
easily be seen by considering some of the facts about vision
and audition that I described in Chapter 1. One cannot understand how we see and recognize pictures such as those
in Figures 1.1-1.4, or the sounds such as those in Figure
1.22, without analyzing how the networks of cells that are
activated by these pictures or sounds respond to them.
Responses of individual visual or auditory cells, taken in
isolation, are usually too ambiguous to control any behavior. The distributed pattern of activity to which these cells
contribute provides a context in which their individual activities take on functional meaning.
Noise-saturation dilemma: Pattern processing by cell
networks without noise or saturation. With this in
mind, I can immediately ask how activity patterns across
networks of noisy cells with !nitely many sites maintain their sensitivity to inputs patterns whose overall size
may change wildly through time. In particular, multiple
input sources may converge on individual cells, and do so

How a Brain Makes a Mind

at different times and with different amplitudes. How do
the cells manage to respond without being contaminated
by either internal cellular noise—when the sizes of their
inputs are all small—or by saturating their activities at
their maximal value—when the sizes of all their inputs are
large? I have called this basic problem the noise-saturation
dilemma (Figures 1.5 and 2.15).
Figure 2.15 emphasizes that all of the cell activities xi
fluctuate within a !nite range of values, indeed such a small
range of values that oscilloscopes were needed to amplify
them enough so that they would be visible to experimentalists. H. Keffer Hartline, whose Hartline-Ratliff-Miller
equation is summarized in Figure 2.13, was an early user of
oscilloscopes to amplify the signals that he was recording
from in optic nerve !bers and, later, from networks of cells
in the retina of the Limulus, or horseshoe crab.
Despite being restricted to such small activity values,
cells can respond to input patterns without them being
unduly contaminated by noise or saturation. Figure 1.5
already depicted the problem that is avoided in this way
by illustrating the desired cell activities in response to
an input pattern, as contrasted with a saturated activity
pattern in response to large inputs in the lower left, and
a noisy response in response to small inputs in the lower
right. To achieve further clarity, Figure 2.16 shows both
the input patterns, in the left column, and the activity patterns that they could have caused, in the right column, if
the noise-saturation dilemma were not solved. Showing
both is needed to understand how this problem can be
solved.
The upper left image in Figure 2.16 shows an input pattern Ii across a network of feature-selective cells. Although
there are only !nitely many cells, the green curve that depicts input size at each cell is interpolated between cells
for simplicity. This input pattern has two peaks, corresponding to the fact that the inputs to the corresponding

|

71

FIGURE 2.16. To solve the noise-saturation dilemma, individual
neurons in a network that is receiving a distributed spatial patterns of inputs need to remain sensitive to the ratio of the input
to them divided by all the inputs in that spatial pattern. Although
the inputs are delivered to a finite number of neurons, the input
and activity patterns are drawn continuously across the cells for
simplicity.

feature-selective cells are the most important. The input
pattern below this one reduces all the input sizes proportionally, thereby preserving the relative important of
inputs to the cells, until all the inputs are small. Because all
of these inputs are sufficiently small, the activity pattern xi
that they cause is contaminated by noise, as shown in the
!gure to the right of the input pattern. The lowest input
pattern increases all the input sizes proportionally, again
preserving the relative importance of the inputs, until
even the smallest input is large. Here, even the smallest
input is sufficiently large that it can turn on all the sites at
its target cell, as can all the other inputs as well. The result
is a saturated activity pattern, as illustrated to the right of
this input pattern.
Computing ratios: Brightness constancy and contrast as
two sides of a coin. In order to solve the noise-saturation
problem, somehow the cells in the network need to remain
sensitive to the relative sizes, or ratios θi = I i / ∑ I j , of the
j

FIGURE 2.15. The noise-saturation dilemma: How do neurons
retain their sensitivity to the relative sizes of input patterns
whose total sizes can change greatly through time?

inputs, as the total input becomes arbitrarily large. In fact,
many kinds of data show that neurons can preserve their
sensitivity to input ratios as total inputs increase without
changing their relative size. A famous example of this property is called brightness constancy. Brightness constancy
illustrates the far more general process of discounting the
illuminant, which enables us to perceive the real colors of
scenes as we see them under very different illumination
conditions, a process that I will explain in greater detail in
Chapter 4. In Figure 2.17, a light gray disk is surrounded
by a darker gray annulus. A light shines on this entire

72

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 2.17. Brightness constancy.

image. The illumination level is chosen to have a series of
different intensities. No matter what intensity is chosen,
within a wide range, an observer who is asked to match the
perceived brightness of the gray disk will always chose the
same disk from the array of possible matches in the right
column of the !gure. In other words, the perceived brightness of the gray disk is constant despite changes in overall
illumination. On the other hand, if only the gray disk were
illuminated at increasing intensities, with the annulus illuminated at a constant intensity, then the gray disk would
look progressively brighter.
When any part of an image is illuminated at higher
intensities, the relative amount of light that is reflected to
our eyes remains the same, even while the total amount of
light increases with the intensity of the incident illumination. Each shade of gray reflects a different fraction of the
light that it receives. This fraction is called its reflectance,
with a lighter gray reflecting a larger fraction of light than
a darker gray. Thus, when the entire image is illuminated
by the same light intensity, the relative amounts of light
that are reflected from every position of the image remain
the same, even while that intensity varies a lot. Our brains
compute these constant ratios to solve the noise-saturation
dilemma. However, if only the gray disk receives increasing illumination, then the relative amounts of light that are
reflected by the disk and the annulus are no longer constant, so brightness constancy is not perceived in this case.
One implication of the fact that our brains compute
relative amounts of light is that ratios add up to a constant,
namely 1. This fact implies another famous visual property
that is called brightness contrast, which may be understood
as the other side of the coin to brightness constancy. As
illustrated by Figure 2.18, consider two images with the
same gray disk in the middle, but surround one by a darker
gray annulus than the other one. Then the disk that is surrounded by the darker gray annulus looks brighter than
the disk that is surrounded by the lighter gray annulus.
This contrast effect occurs because, if all the ratios sum

FIGURE 2.18. Brightness contrast.

to a constant value, then smaller ratios from the annulus
will lead to the perception of larger ratios, and thus greater
brightness, from the disk.
A thought experiment for solving the noise-saturation
dilemma in cellular networks. I will now use a simple gedanken, or thought, experiment to explain how our brains
compute the ratios of input sizes. Despite the simplicity of
the ideas that I will now describe, they have far reaching
implications that influence how all kinds of input patterns
are computed by networks of cells, both throughout our
brains and in essentially all cellular organs of multicellular
living creatures.
All that I need to proceed with the thought experiment is a property that I mentioned above which all
cells share: They only have !nitely many excitable sites.
In!nity does not exist in biology! Accordingly, Figure
2.19 shows a network of cells each of which has the same
!nite number B of excitable sites, with the ith cell Vi receiving an input Ii that may have any !nite intensity, including zero. Also depicted are the cell activities xi that
are proportional to the number of excited sites. For simplicity, assume that this proportionality constant is equal
to 1. We can then conclude that there are B - xi unexcited
sites in each cell.
How can inputs Ii saturate all the excitable sites B of
their cell? Figure 2.20 shows how this can happen using
the simplest equation whereby an input Ii can excite its
cell. There are no interactions between the cells in this
network, as illustrated by the image in the upper right of
d
Figure 2.20. The term xi in this equation just describes
dt
the rate with which activity xi gets turned on or off through
time. That is why it is called the time derivative of xi. The
!rst term − Axi on the right hand side of this equation just
says that activity xi decays spontaneously (note the minus
d
sign that tends to make xi negative) at the !nite rate A
dt

How a Brain Makes a Mind

|

73

Figure 2.21 shows what happens when each input stays
constant long enough for all the activities xi to converge to
zero. To solve for the equilibrium value of each activity xi ,
d
just set its rate of change xi equal to zero and rearrange
dt
terms in the resulting equation to compute its equilibrium
value. Then substitute I i = θi I into this equation. And increase the total intensity I . As I increases to sufficiently
large values, each xi approaches B. In other words, each
activity across the network saturates at its maximal value.
The reason for saturation is clear: There is nothing to
stop unexcited sites from getting excited more and more
as the total input increases. How, then, must the network be modi!ed to compute the pattern-sensitive ratios
θi = I i / ∑ I j ? As Figure 2.22 notes, in order for the ith
j

FIGURE 2.19. Computing with cells: Infinity does not exist in

biology!

FIGURE 2.21. How shunting saturation turns on all of a cell’s
excitable sites as input intensity increases.
FIGURE 2.20. Shunting saturation occurs when inputs get
larger to non-interacting cells.

through time until it reaches an equilibrium value of zero.
The main action takes place as a result of the second term
of this equation, namely +( B − xi )I i . This term says that
the unexcited sites, which number ( B − xi ) can get excited
d
(note the plus sign that tends to make xi positive) at a
dt
rate that increases with the intensity of the input Ii. The
multiplicative interaction between these two terms can
also be described as mass action between unexcited sites
and input intensity.
You can see how saturation occurs by writing each
input Ii as its relative intensity θi times its total intensity
I = ∑ I j . Thus I i = θi I .
j

FIGURE 2.22. An on-center o!-surround network is capable of
computing input ratios.

74

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

cell Vi to compute the ratio of all the inputs, interactions
between the cells are needed so that each cell knows what
the inputs from the other cells are, which occur in the denominator of the ratio that de!nes θi . Figure 2.22 points to
what kind of interaction between cells can compute input
ratios at each cell.
On-center off-surround anatomies can compute input
ratios. Figure 2.22 distinguishes the input I i that tries to
turn on unexcited sites at cell Vi from the other inputs that
are needed to compute θi . In particular, input I i occurs in
both the numerator and the denominator of θi , so increasing I i also increases θi . In other words, I i excites the cell. In
contrast, all of the inputs I k from the other cells occur only
in the denominator of θi . Increasing any of these inputs
causes θi to decrease. In other words, all the other inputs
inhibit the cell.
Said in another way, each input I i excites its own
cell and inhibits all the other cells. Figure 2.22 draws
this kind of interaction in the lower right. It describes
an on-center off-surround anatomy! Thus, one reason
why on-center off-surround anatomies are ubiquitous in
brains and other cellular tissues is that they de!ne interactions that can solve the noise-saturation dilemma,
and thereby enable cellular networks to process distributed input patterns without noise or saturation even if
these input patterns arrive with very different intensities
through time.
Shunting on-center off-surround networks solve the
noise-saturation dilemma. Figure 2.22 describes the
kind of anatomical interactions that can solve the noisesaturation dilemma, but not the dynamics, or neurophysiological laws, that can do so in these anatomies. Figure
2.23 summarizes the kinds of dynamics that interact in
these anatomies to accomplish that goal.
The top equation in Figure 2.23 provides the solution.
The !rst two terms on the right hand side of this equation are just the ones that, left to themselves, would cause
saturation, as shown in Figure 2.21. The !rst term allows
passive decay of activity. The second term + ( B − xi ) I i
allows unexcited sites ( B − xi ) to be turned on by input I i .
The third term − xi ∑ I k on the right hand side of the equak ≠i

tion in Figure 2.23 says that excited sites xi are turned off
(note the minus sign) at a rate proportional to the number
of excited sites xi times the total input ∑ I k from the offk ≠i

surround of the network.
When the inputs stay constant for awhile, the activities again converge to constant values, so the time
d
xi can be set equal to zero to compute
derivatives
dt
equilibrium activities. When this is done, the following

FIGURE 2.23. The equations for a shunting on-center o!surround network. Shunting terms lead to many beautiful and
important properties of these networks, which are found ubiquitously, in one form or another, in all cellular tissues.

Minor Mathematical Miracle occurs: Bringing together all
the input terms that have the common multiple of xi yields
the term −( A + I i + ∑ I k )xi. Note that the on-center input
k ≠i

I i and the off-surround input ∑ I k sum to the total input
k ≠i

I! As a result, the equilibrium activity xi = I i / ( A + I ) has
the total input I, not the ith input I i , in its denominator, as
it did in Figure 2.21. If we now substitute I i = θi I into this
equation and rearrange terms, we !nd the equilibrium activity xi = θi [ BI / ( A + I )] .
Remarkably, this equilibrium activity xi remains proportional to the ratio θi no matter how large the total input
I is chosen. The noise-saturation dilemma has been solved!
It has been solved by using mass action dynamics in an oncenter off-surround anatomy.
The ability of each equilibrium activity to remain proportional to its ratio is the main property that is needed
to explain how brightness constancy occurs (Figure 2.17).
What about brightness contrast (Figure 2.18)? Is the total
activity conserved? The bottom equation in Figure 2.23
shows that the answer is Yes. One can see this just by
adding all the activities and showing that the total activity
n
x = ∑ k =1 x k is bounded by B, no matter how large the total
activity I may be chosen, thereby proving total activity
normalization.
Infinite dynamic range, automatic gain control, limited
capacity, and real-time probabilities. The properties of
this shunting on-center off-surround network can be described in several ways that are all worth thinking about.
For one, the fact that cell activities remain proportional
to the relative input sizes, no matter how large the total

How a Brain Makes a Mind

input becomes, can be called an infinite dynamic range.
This crucial property arises because the inputs multiply
the activities, in both the on-center and off-surround of
the network. This multiplicative property is also called
automatic gain control because it enables the circuit to
work well in response to a wide range of input sizes. The
terms where inputs multiply activities control the equilibrium activities and also the rates with which activities
converge to equilibrium, with larger inputs causing faster
reaction rates.
As I noted in Figure 1.8, the property of total activity
normalization also occurs in recurrent, or feedback,
shunting on-center off-surround networks (Figure 1.6)
that are used to store input patterns in short term memory.
Total activity normalization implies a limited capacity of
the network (Posner, 1980). Because of limited capacity,
when more cells compete, each one will tend to be less
active. Said in another way, increasing the activity of one
cell comes at the cost of decreasing the activities of other
cells. When too many inputs occur, some of their cells may
thus not be activated enough to overcome their quenching
threshold, and will not be stored in short term memory
(Figure 1.9).
The sum of all of the activities is bounded by a constant in a non-recurrent on-center off-surround network (Figure 2.23). This sum converges through time to
a constant in a recurrent network (Figure 1.7). Activities
in such a recurrent network thus behave like probabilities that are dynamically changing through time.
A larger activity may be interpreted to mean that the
features coded by its cell population are more probable.
Various of the neural architectures that this book describes may likewise be interpreted as carrying out one
or another kind of probabilistic decision making, planning, or the like.
Deriving the membrane equations of neurophysiological from a thought experiment. The mass action,
or shunting, dynamics that we have been led to by the
thought experiment are the dynamics used by neurons.
They are also called the membrane equations of neurophysiology. The equation at the top of Figure 2.24 shows
this familiar equation for the variable voltage V of a
cell in terms of its capacitance C; three constant saturation voltages: an excitatory saturation voltage V+, an
inhibitory saturation voltage V-, and a passive saturation
voltage Vp; and three conductances that may or may not
vary through time: an excitatory conductance g+, an inhibitory conductance g-, and a passive conductance g p.
When these variables are set equal to the values in the
lower right of Figure 2.24, the result is the equation at
the top of Figure 2.23. We have hereby been led to derive
the membrane equations of neurophysiology from our
thought experiment.

|

75

FIGURE 2.24. The membrane equations of neurophysiology
describe how cell voltages change in response to excitatory, inhibitory, and passive input channels. Each channel is described by
a potential di!erence multiplied by a conductance. With the special choices shown in the lower right hand corner, this equation
defines a feedforward shunting on- center o!-surround network.

Towards a universal
developmental code using
mass action cooperativecompetitive dynamics
We have actually done a lot more than that, because this
kind of shunting dynamics solves the noise-saturation dilemma only if it is carried out an on-center off-surround
anatomy. This basic fact raises the question: Did the membrane equations and on-center off-surround anatomies
co-evolve during the evolutionary process, so that cell networks could process distributed feature patterns without
noise or saturation from the earliest stages of the evolution
of cellular organisms?
Two languages can equally well describe this result,
and one of them generalizes to all cellular tissues: On the
one hand, there are the shunting on-center off-surround
anatomies that are found in our brains. On the other
hand, there are the mass action cooperative-competitive
systems that can be found in all cellular tissues. It is this
latter language that generalizes throughout the world of
living cellular organisms and that clari!es an important
reason why competition occurs, not only to guide natural
selection on the level of species, but also to support processing of distributed patterns at every organizational level
in all cellular organisms. This latter language is part of a
universal developmental code that I will further discuss
in Chapter 17.

76

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Weber law, adaptation, and shift property. So far, I
have mostly discussed the simplest feedforward, or nonrecurrent, shunting on-center off-surround network. Even
this network has important properties that are also found
in the brain. After describing one of these properties, I
will show you how the simplest equation can be altered in
easy incremental steps to realize a wide range of additional
useful properties. These examples illustrate a kind of conceptual evolution of competitive systems that describes
and mechanistically organizes the useful properties of
ever-more-complex non-recurrent shunting on-center
off-surround networks. I already showed you in Chapter
1 how different feedback signal functions of a feedback,
or recurrent, shunting on-center off-surround network
(Figure 1.6) can support very different transformations of
input patterns into stored short-term memories (Figures
1.7-1.9).
The new property of the simplest non-recurrent network is a manifestation of how solving the noise-saturation
dilemma enables it to maintain its sensitivity to inputs
even when the off-surround may vary greatly in strength.
This shift property is most easily seen by plotting each
equilibrium activity xi against the logarithm K = ln( I i ) of
the input I i to its on-center. The subscript i is not included
in the notation K for simplicity. When this is done, xi ( K , J )
can be plotted as a function of K for different !xed values
J = ∑ I k of the total off-surround input. The resulting

FIGURE 2.25. An on-center o!-surround network can respond
to increasing on- center excitatory inputs without a loss of sensitivity. Instead, as the o!-surround input increases, the region
of a cell’s maximal sensitivity to an increasing on- center input
shifts to a range of larger inputs. This is because the o!-surround
divides the e!ect of the on- center input, an e!ect that is often
called a Weber law.

k ≠i

plots at the top of Figure 2.25 show how each activity xi
increases with increases in K when the total off-surround
input J is !xed at successively larger values J1, J2,. . . As J is
chosen at successively larger values, the curves of the corresponding activity functions xi shift to the right; hence
the name shift property. The main point is that each xi
begins to increase at larger values of K in response to a
larger choice of J, but the same maximum activity is eventually approached. This property is also called a Weber law
because it shows how the sensitivity of each cell to excitatory on-center inputs is divided by the size J of the total
inhibitory input to it.
The shift property can be proved with simple high
school algebra. The main idea is shown in the bottom equation in Figure 2.25. Here two of the curves in the !gure,
with different off-surround inputs J1 and J2, are equated,
one a shift S of the other. Then one solves for S. The resulting shift S is shown at the lower right of Figure 2.25.
Shift property and shunting on-center off-surround network in the mudpuppy retina. In 1971, Frank Werblin
published neurophysiological data from the retina of an
aquatic salamander called the mudpuppy, or Necturus
maculosus (Werblin, 1971). His data also describe a shift
property when the on-center input is plotted in logarithmic coordinates (Figure 2.26). The main point to emphasize is what did not happen: The dynamic range of the

FIGURE 2.26. The mudpuppy retina exhibits the shift property
that occurs in the feedforward shunting on- center o!-surround
network in Figure 2.25. As a result, its sensitivity also shifts in
response to di!erent background o!-surrounds, and therefore
exhibits no compression (dashed purple lines).

cell responses did not get smaller as the off-surround was
chosen at larger values, as illustrated by the dashed purple
curves in Figure 2.26. Thus, the mudpuppy retina solves
the noise-saturation dilemma, leading one to wonder if
it does so using a shunting on-center off-surround network. Earlier studies showed that, in fact, an on-center
off-surround network does exist in the mudpuppy retina.
As illustrated at the bottom of Figure 2.27, retinal photoreceptors (R) excite their target bipolar cells (B) as well as
horizontal cells (H) that carry inhibitory off-surround signals to other photoreceptors. Thus, by the time the second

How a Brain Makes a Mind

FIGURE 2.27. A schematic of the on-center o!-surround network that occurs in the mudpuppy retina, including the three
main cell types: Receptors, horizontal cells, and bipolar cells.

|

77

FIGURE 2.28. Silent inhibition is replaced by hyperpolarization
when the inhibitory saturating potential is smaller than the passive saturating potential. Then an adaptation level is created that
determines how big input ratios need to be to activate their cells.

layer of cells in the retina, the bipolar cells, are activated
by light inputs, the noise-saturation dilemma has already
been solved.

Carpenter and myself about light adaptation in turtle
cones (Carpenter and Grossberg, 1981).

Intracellular adaptation within photoreceptors creates a Weber law acting in time. The noise-saturation
dilemma must actually already be solved in the photoreceptors, even before they activate the bipolar-horizontal
cell network. This has to happen because, otherwise, individual photoreceptors could saturate in response to intense inputs even before they could generate outputs to the
bipolar cells and horizontal cells. Indeed, we are capable
of seeing in bright sunlight as well as in dimly lit rooms,
at least after undergoing a suitable interval of adaptation
to the new ambient illumination level. Photoreceptor adaptation is, however, intracellular, not intercellular like an
on-center off-surround network. Its intracellular process
adapts through time, rather than across space as in the case
of an on-center off-surround network, by using a habituative transmitter gate, or medium-term memory (Figures
2.3 and 2.11), to divide current inputs by a time average
of previous inputs. In this way, intense ambient illumination causes division of the large current light intensity
by a time average of recent large light intensities, thereby
normalizing the response via an intracellular Weber law,
thereby keeping the cell’s responses within its sensitive dynamic range. Thus, both intracellular adaptation within
photoreceptors and intercellular adaptation by the oncenter off-surround networks that photoreceptors activate
both give rise to Weber laws that normalize and maintain
cell sensitivity in response to inputs that may vary greatly
through time. Interested readers can !nd a lot of classical
neurophysiological data about photoreceptor adaptation
and a model that explains them in a 1981 article by Gail

From silent inhibition to hyperpolarization and adaptation levels. The shift property describes an important
property of the simplest shunting on-center off-surround
network by using logarithmic coordinates. Additional
properties may be realized by re!ning this network in
simple stages. One such re!nement replaces the property
of silent inhibition (Figures 2.23 and 2.24). This property
says that the inhibitory saturation voltage V- and the passive saturation voltage Vp are the same. As a result, no
matter how strong off-surround inhibition may become,
the activity or potential of a cell can only be driven towards the equilibrium potential that is de!ned by the passive saturation voltage, but not below it.
Figure 2.28 replaces silent inhibition by choosing the
inhibitory saturation voltage V- to be smaller than the passive saturation voltage Vp, so that activities, or voltages, can
be driven by large enough off-surround inhibitory inputs
to be smaller than the equilibrium voltage. In the notation
of the top equation in Figure 2.28, the choice of the inhibitory saturation voltage C that is greater than zero accomplishes this because activity xi may then be driven to the
negative voltage –C before the term (xi + C) equals zero,
and thus prevents the off-surround from further inhibiting the activity. When activity xi is less than zero, it is said
to be hyperpolarized, or less than the equilibrium voltage.
The other equations in Figure 2.28 use the usual
method to compute the equilibrium activity that is caused
by constant inputs. This is described by the last equation
in Figure 2.28. As in the simplest shunting competitive
network, a Weber law term ( B + C )I / ( A + I ) multiplies the

78

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Adaptation levels require a broken symmetry between
excitation and inhibition. This fact immediately raises
the question: How does the brain ensure that enough
ratios are bigger than the adaptation level? This is necessary to make their activities positive, and some of them
large enough both to represent important features and to
trigger output signals to other processing levels.
All the ratios are, by de!nition, less than one. So too is
the adaptation level C / ( B + C ), because both the excitatory
saturation voltage B and the inhibitory saturation voltage
C are positive. However, if there are n cells in the network,
and all the ratios sum to one, then quite a few ratios will
have to be less than 1/n for enough of them to be bigger
than 1/n.
These considerations imply that the adaptation level
C / ( B + C ) needs to be chosen considerably smaller than
one in order for sufficiently many ratios to be positive. As
Figure 2.29 summarizes, this implies that B must be much
larger than C. In other words, the difference between the
smallest possible activity – C and the equilibrium activity
0 is much smaller than the difference between the largest
possible activity B and 0, as illustrated in the upper left
corner of Figure 2.29. If we consider that an equal distance between these parameters and 0 would be a symmetric solution to how to choose these parameters, then
what actually occurs represents a broken symmetry between excitatory and inhibition, with excitation favored.
Consequences of this broken symmetry between excitation and inhibition are ubiquitous throughout our brains.

Informational noise suppression and the selection of potentially informative activity patterns. One property of
great importance can immediately be derived from this
broken symmetry. It is one of the properties which ensure
that noise will be suppressed before it can contaminate
useful information processing. I have already mentioned
one kind of noise suppression that is carried out by recurrent shunting on-center off-surround networks. This kind
of noise is the familiar kind: random or quasi-random
small endogenous activations of neurons that could otherwise interfere with information processing. Figures 1.7-1.9
show how signals that are faster-than-linear at small activity levels can suppress this kind of noise.
There is also another potentially catastrophic kind of
noise that can occur even when endogenous or external
inputs may be large. I call this kind of noise informational
noise. Consider the following example of informational
noise in order to !x ideas. Suppose that there are multiple inputs converging on individual cells through time.
Suppose moreover that, during a given time interval, the
total inputs to each of the cells in the network are equal,
even though the individual inputs that contribute to these
total inputs may differ across cells. This state of affairs is illustrated in the top left graph of Figure 2.30. Such an input
pattern is uniform, or has a zero spatial frequency.
A uniform input pattern is uninformative. It does
not provide more evidence for some features over others.
It would be catastrophic if uniform input patterns could
drive new learning across a network, since all featurallyselective LTM traces could be wiped out.
The broken symmetry provides a simple solution to this
problem. It can quickly transform a uniform input pattern,
no matter how large its shared input size may be, into a
zero activity pattern, as illustrated by the !gure on the top
right of Figure 2.30. Such an activity pattern could not,

FIGURE 2.29. How the adaptation level is chosen to enable
sufficiently distinct inputs to activate their cells.

FIGURE 2.30. Choosing the adaptation level to achieve informational noise suppression.

relative activity, or ratio, θi of inputs. In addition, there is
a new term C / ( B + C ) that is called the adaptation level.
The activity xi is positive if θi is bigger than the adaptation
level, and negative, or hyperpolarized, if it is smaller than
the adaptation level.

How a Brain Makes a Mind

for example, drive any learning via gated steepest descent
(Figure 2.11) because all learning gates would be closed.
As Chapter 5 will explain, informational noise suppression
helps to prevent our brains from spuriously using noise to
learn new recognition categories via the instar learning
laws that obey the gated steepest descent learning law.
How does the broken symmetry cause informational
noise suppression? If the total input to every cell is the same
for awhile, then each activity will also become the same, so
that all the cell activity ratios will equal 1/n if there are
n cells in the network. Noise suppression immediately
follows by choosing the adaptation level to also equal l/n
(Figure 2.30). Then all activities will equal zero no matter
how intense the total input to each cell may be. The choice
l/n for the adaptation level will also, in response to a nonuniform input pattern, allow quite a few cell activities to be
positive if enough other cells are hyperpolarized.
Informational noise suppression and bottom-up/topdown pattern matching. Informational noise suppression has many useful properties, as well. For example, it
suggests how bottom-up and top-down input patterns to
a network should be matched. Figure 1.11 called attention
to this situation by summarizing some of the dynamics
that occur when a learned top-down expectation is sufficiently badly mismatched with a bottom-up input pattern.
Chapter 5 will discuss how and why this occurs by introducing and explaining how Adaptive Resonance Theory,
or ART, works.
But how should patterns be matched in the !rst place?
The property of informational noise suppression provided
an early clue that then evolved into a more precise understanding when ART came on the scene a decade later.
Figure 2.31 summarizes the main idea. The top image
shows two input patterns that are out of phase with each
other, with the most important features of one input pattern occurring where the least important features occur in

FIGURE 2.31. How noise suppression enables matching of
bottom-up and top- down input patterns.

|

79

the other input pattern, and conversely. When these input
patterns add at their target cells, the result is a uniform
input pattern that is suppressed as informational noise. In
other words, input patterns that are out of phase with each
other are mismatched and suppressed.
In contrast, if both input patterns are in phase with
each other, as in the bottom image of Figure 2.31, then they
are added and, in fact, ampli!ed by the automatic gain control that occur during shunting dynamics (Figure 2.32).
These properties were eventually incorporated into the
ART Matching Rule that describes how such matching
occurs (Figure 1.25). ART went beyond these heuristics
by also showing how a top-down expectation, when it acts
alone, can modulate, sensitize, or prime target cells, but
not fully activate them. Chapter 5 will explain this and
much more about how object attention works.
How does informational noise suppression arise during
development? Opposites attract! The above examples
illustrate how useful the property of information noise
suppression is in many brain processes. But how does it
arise during development? A big clue, indeed a prediction that goes beyond current data, can be seen by rewriting this property in a different way using the equation
in Figure 2.33. This equation is easily derived by setting
the adaptation level C / ( B + C ) equal to 1/n and then
rearranging terms.
Rearranging terms is very simple to do, but the implications of the result are potentially profound. This is because the excitatory and inhibitory saturation voltages C
and B, respectively, on the left hand side of the equation
are intracellular parameters, whereas the numbers 1 and
(n-1) on the right hand side of the equation are intercellular parameters, indeed the number of on-center (1) and
off-surround (n-1) connections of each input Ii to the network, as illustrated by the !gure below the equation.

FIGURE 2.32. Matching amplifies the matched pattern due to
automatic gain control. See terms I and J in the equation.

80

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 2.33. An opposite-attracts rule during the development of intercellular connections can lead to a mature network
that realizes informational noise suppression.

How can such an equality emerge as a result of development? The obvious answer is: Use an Opposite Attracts
Rule in which the broken intracellular asymmetry between
inhibitory and excitatory saturation voltages attracts the
growth of excitatory and inhibitory connections until they
create and match a broken intercellular asymmetry. Then
informational noise suppression will follow automatically.
This way of thinking suggests that varying the degree
of asymmetry of depolarization to hyperpolarization
in Figure 2.29 can alter how on-center and off-surround
connections will grow during development. I do not
know any experiments that have tried to explain how
these intracellular biophysical parameters and the ensuing network intercellular connectivity are coordinated to
achieve informational noise suppression. They would not
be easy experiments to do, but the answer should be interesting, especially if deviations from informational noise
suppression covary with predicted properties of a cell’s
adaptation level.
From a global off-surround to a distance-dependent one
that preserves noise suppression. The on-center of the
network in Figure 2.23 consists of only one cell, or cell
population, and the off-surround inhibits all other cells
equally. This is a limiting case of the on-center and offsurround connections that are typically found in vivo. A
more typical situation is depicted in Figure 2.34. Here,
the on-center may be narrow, but nonetheless may include several cells. An input to the ith cell will often excite
nearby cells with a connection strength that decreases in
a Gaussian manner with distance from the ith cell, as illustrated by the green on-center pro!le in Figure 2.34. The
off-surround is broader than the on-center, but instead
of inhibiting all other cells equally, may inhibit all cells
around the ith cell, including the ith cell, with a strength
that also decreases in a Gaussian manner with distance,

FIGURE 2.34. How to achieve informational noise suppression
in a network with multiple parallel processing channels.

but more slowly than the on-center kernel, as illustrated by
the red off-surround pro!le in Figure 2.34.
The connections in Figure 2.34 replace the “single
channel” network of Figure 2.23 with a “multiple channel”
network in which neighboring cells influence one another,
but may be hardly influenced, if at all, by cells that are not
within the span of their off-surround. Because the multiple
channel anatomy preserves the broken symmetry of narrower on-center than off-surround network connections,
it can still interact with the intracellular broken symmetry
to achieve informational noise suppression.
The top equation in Figure 2.35 describes such a multiple scale network. Instead of the very narrow on-center
and global off-surround that is depicted in the upper
left image, there is a Gaussian on-center and a broader
Gaussian off-surround in the multiple scale network, as
depicted in the upper right image. These excitatory and
inhibitory interactions are de!ned by the Gaussian kernels Cki and Eki, respectively. The equilibrium activity xi is
shown in the lower left of Figure 2.35. In this equation, the
total activity I again de!ned a Weber law effect. Instead of
a single ratio &i on the right hand side of this equation, as
in Figure 2.23, all the ratios &k of all the cells Vk, ranging
from 1 through n, appear in the numerator of this equation. The ratios &k in the numerator are multiplied by kernels Fki that are de!ned by a weighted difference of the oncenter and off-surround kernels, which is why it is called a
weighted Difference Of Gaussians, or DOG (Figure 2.35).
The ratios &k in the denominator are multiplied by kernels
Gki that are de!ned by a weighted sum of the on-center
and off-surround kernels, which is why it is called a Sum
Of Gaussians, or SOG. The SOG normalizes the effect of
the DOG. This equation hereby shows how both ratio processing and total activity normalization are realized in a
multiple scale network.

How a Brain Makes a Mind

FIGURE 2.35. The equilibrium activities of a shunting network

with Gaussian on- center o!-surround kernels are sensitive to the
ratio- contrasts of the input patterns that they process. The terms
in the denominator of the equilibrium activities accomplish this
using the shunting on- center and o!-surround terms.

Informational noise suppression implies contour detection in a multiple scale network. Dividing a DOG by a
SOG computes the contrast of the inputs to each position.
In particular, when the network is calibrated to also suppress informational noise, cells selectively respond at positions in the network where input contrasts change sufficiently rapidly across the network. In response to a visual
image, for example, such a network responds selectively to
positions where there are sufficiently intense luminance
edges, textures, or shading. This property will be essential for understanding all of my explanations of how vision
works in Chapter 3 and beyond.
Informational noise suppression can easily be realized
in a multiple scale network. Simply choose all ratios &k to
equal 1/n and require that all the resulting equilibrium activities xi be less than or equal to zero. When this is done,
the sums can be carried out separately for the on-center
and off-surround kernels in the numerator of the equation for equilibrium activity in Figure 2.35, leading to the
n
n
inequality B ∑ k =1C ki ≤ D ∑ k =1 E ki at the top left of Figure
2.36. This inequality again shows how intracellular saturation voltages and intercellular connections work together
to accomplish informational noise suppression.
When this is done, it is easy to see how this network
responds selectively at positions where the input size
changes sufficiently rapidly across space, whether due to
an edge, texture, or shading gradient. The rectangular
input Ii in Figure 2.36 illustrates why this is true. Due to
informational noise suppression, cells are not activated at
positions either where the input equals zero or where the
input is large but constant across space. Cells are only activated where the input changes rapidly, as illustrated by
the response pro!le for xi across position in Figure 2.36.

|

81

FIGURE 2.36. Informational noise suppression in network with
Gaussian on- center and o!-surround function as contour detectors that are sensitive to ratio- contrast.

By including multiple scales, informational noise suppression thus provides us with a contour detector that is
sensitive to the relative size of input changes across space.
In applications to vision, such a ratio contrast detector is
sensitive to the reflectances of objects that reflect light to
the eyes. This property helps to explain how our brains
compensate for variable illumination levels, or “discount
the illuminant”. I will explain more completely how our
brains accomplish this feat in Chapter 4, where I will
also show you computer simulations of this and other
visual properties that we use every day to accomplish
multiple tasks.

How does one evolve a
computational brain
y
theoretical method
The above discussion illustrates that no single step of theoretical derivation can derive a whole brain. One needs a
method for deriving a brain in stages, or cycles, much as
evolution has incrementally discovered ever more complex
brains over many thousands of years. The following theoretical method has been successfully applied many times
since I !rst used it in 1957. It embodies a kind of conceptual evolutionary process for deriving a brain.
Because “brain evolution needs to achieve behavioral success”, we need to start with data that embody indices of behavioral success. That is why, as, as illustrated
in Figure 2.37, one starts with Behavioral Data from
scores or hundreds of psychological experiments. These
data are analyzed as the result of an individual adapting

82

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 2.37. My models begin with behavioral data, since
brains are designed to achieve behavioral success. The text explains how the models evolve in stages, through a process of successive refinements, or unlumpings. These unlumpings together
carry out a kind of conceptual evolution, leading to models that
can explain and predict ever larger psychological and neurobiological databases.

autonomously in real time to a changing world. This is the
Art of Modeling. It requires that one be able to infer from
static data curves the dynamical processes that control individual behaviors occurring in real time. One of the hardest things that I teach to my students to do is “how to think
in real time” to be able to carry out this speculative leap.
Properly carried out, this analysis leads to the discovery of new Design Principles that are embodied by these
behavioral processes. These Design Principles highlight
the functional meaning of the data, and clarify how individual behaviors occurring in real time give rise to these
static data curves.
These principles are then converted into the simplest
Mathematical Model using a method of minimal anatomies, which is a form of Occam’s Razor, or principle of
parsimony. Such a mathematical model embodies the psychological principles using the simplest possible differential equations. By “simplest” I mean that, if any part of the
derived model is removed, then a signi!cant fraction of
the targeted data could no longer be explained. One then
analyzes the model mathematically and simulates it on the
computer, showing along the way how variations on the
minimal anatomy can realize the design principles in different individuals or species.
This analysis has always provided functional explanations and Behavioral Predictions for much larger behavioral data bases than those used to discover the Design
Principles. The most remarkable fact is, however, that
the behaviorally derived model always looks like part of
a brain, thereby explaining a body of challenging Neural
Data and making novel Brain Predictions.

The derivation hereby links mind to brain via psychological organizational principles and their mechanistic
realization as a mathematically de!ned neural network.
This startling fact is what I !rst experienced as a college
Freshman taking Introductory Psychology, and it changed
my life forever.
I conclude from having had this experience scores of
times since 1957 that brains look the way that they do because they embody a natural computational realization
for controlling autonomous adaptation in real-time to
a changing world. Moreover, the Behavior(Principles(
Model(Neural derivation predicts new functional roles for
both known and unknown brain mechanisms by linking
the brain data to how it helps to ensure behavioral success.
As I noted above, the power of this method is illustrated
by the fact that scores of these predictions about brain and
behavior have been supported by experimental data 5-30
years after they were !rst published.
Having made the link from behavior to brain, one can
then “burn the candle from both ends” by pressing both
top-down from Behavioral Data and bottom-up from
Brain Data to clarify what the model can and cannot explain at its current stage of derivation. No model can explain everything. At each stage of development, the model
can cope with certain environmental challenges but not
others. An important part of the mathematical and computational analyses is to characterize the boundary between
the known and the unknown; that is, which challenges the
model can cope with and which it cannot. The shape of this
boundary between the known and the unknown helps to
direct the theorist’s attention to new design principles that
have been omitted from the previous analyses.
The next step is to show how these new design principles can be incorporated into the evolving model in a
self-consistent way, without undermining its previous
mechanisms, thereby leading to a progressively more realistic model, one that can explain and predict ever more
behavioral and neural data. In this way, the model undergoes a type of evolutionary development, as it becomes
able to cope behaviorally with environmental constraints
of ever increasing subtlety and complexity. The Method of
Minimal Anatomies may hereby be viewed as way to functionally understand how increasingly demanding combinations of environmental pressures were incorporated
into brains during the evolutionary process.
If such an Embedding Principle cannot be carried
out—that is, if the model cannot be unlumped or re!ned
in a self-consistent way—then the previous model was, put
simply, wrong, and one needs to !gure out which parts
must be discarded. Such a model is, as it were, an evolutionary dead end. Fortunately, this has not happened to
me since I began my work in 1957 because the theoretical method is so conservative. No theoretical addition
is made unless it is supported by multiple experiments
that cannot be explained in its absence. Where multiple

How a Brain Makes a Mind

mechanistic instantiations of some Design Principles were
possible, they were all developed in models to better understand their explanatory implications. Not all of these
instantiations could survive the pressure of the evolutionary method, but some always could. As a happy result, all
earlier models have been capable of incremental re!nement and expansion.
The cycle of model evolution has been carried out many
times since 1957, leading today to increasing numbers of
models that individually can explain and predict psychological, neurophysiological, anatomical, biophysical, and
even biochemical data. In this speci!c sense, the classical
mind-body problem is now being incrementally solved.

Embedding, unlumping, and
correspondence principles
There are several equivalent ways to describe such a re!nement procedure: It embodies an embedding, unlumping, or
correspondence principle constraint: One needs to be able
to consistently embed the previous model into the new expanded model; the previous model needs to be unlumpable into an increasingly complex model; a correspondence
principle characterizes how the variables of a lumped version of the model can be unlumped into the !ner variables
of a more realistic model.
Correspondence principles are also well known in
physics: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Correspondence_
principle. One famous one is the correspondence principle
that the great Danish physicist, Niels Bohr, used in the early
1900s to link principles of classical mechanics to principles
of quantum theory, and then subsequently to quantum
mechanics. Another is how Albert Einstein linked principles of classical mechanics to Special Relativity Theory.
When a correspondence principle is applied to mind and
brain, it places a surprisingly severe test on the adequacy
of previously discovered theoretical hypotheses. Many
concepts and mechanisms that have been proposed by
scientists over the years fail to satisfy the embedding constraint. They seem plausible within a restricted explanatory context, but fall to pieces when they are confronted
with more severe environmental challenges. That is why
many models come and go with surprising rapidity, and
do not get integrated into principled theories of ever
greater predictive power. In the past, the main organizational principles I have discovered have survived multiple
model unlumping cycles, even while their mathematical
realizations in neural circuits may have become increasingly sophisticated and subtle.
I realized when I began my scienti!c work in
1957 that one would have to derive mind and brain
models in successive approximations by using such an

|

83

embedding constraint. That is why I called my earliest
models Embedding Fields. The word “embedding” summarized the unlumping constraint. The word “!elds” was
a short-hand for the fact that interactions within a neural
network generate the emergent properties that map onto
behavior. These ideas were considered radical in those days,
and they took twenty-!ve years to start to become popular.
I wrote a monograph about Embedding Fields during my
!rst year as a graduate student at the Rockefeller Institute
in 1964, to which I transferred after studying a lot of graduate mathematics and other scienti!c topics at Stanford
University from 1961-1964 (Grossberg, 1964). This monograph summarized the research that I had done since I
was a college Freshman in 1957. It was mailed to 125 of the
world’s top psychologists and neuroscientists. At that time,
the scienti!c community, by and large, had no idea what to
do with it. It can be found at the website http://sites.bu.edu/
steveg/!les/2016/06/Gro1964EmbeddingFields.pdf.
Many cycles of model evolution have occurred since
1957, with many more colleagues joining this activity
starting in the 1980s. All of these evolutionary stages have
successfully built a foundation for their progeny. I did not
dream when this work began that, in my own lifetime, we
could achieve the kind of quantitative understanding of
both psychological and neurobiological data that we are
experiencing today, including as one example explanatory
linkages between !ne details of the anatomy and neurophysiology of identi!ed neurons and brain circuits in the
cerebral cortex with the psychological functions that they
control. Nor did I dream—although I dearly hoped—that
this type of work would become so mainstream in the scienti!c community. The present book will necessarily omit
many of these modeling cycles and sociological transformations. I would like you to realize, however, that this
process of successive approximations is an essential tool
for linking mind to brain, and it still continues today. The
remainder of the book will survey some of the results that
have been derived with this method, starting with visual
perception, since so much of our brain is specialized for
seeing. A reader who wants to get a larger sample of the
archival technical research articles on which this book is
based can scan or download them from my personal web
page, sites.bu.edu/steveg.

A never-ending controversy
I have spent so much time discussing a particular approach
to understanding how brains give rise to minds for several
reasons. The most direct reason is for the reader to realize
that there exists a systematic method for linking brains to
minds that has been incrementally developing ever more
powerful explanatory and predictive theories of different
aspects of biological intelligence for over a half century. I

84

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

hope readers of this book will therefore become skeptical
about, and challenge, claims that “we know nothing about
how the brain works”. A no less important reason for discussing this approach is that the question of how to understand mind and brain is still controversial. Productive
psychologists and neuroscientists may hold very different
opinions about the state of the art and how to advance it.
I believe that there are at least two related reasons for this
enduring controversy:
First, linking brain to mind is one of the most intellectually challenging endeavors in the history of science. It
will take a long time before even simple, and redundantly
supported, theoretical explanations of subtle data will be
universally appreciated, if only because they are based
upon new ways of thinking and neural networks that
typically exhibit nonlinear, nonlocal, and nonstationary
properties.
Second, despite enormous progress during the last
thirty years in building scienti!c infrastructure to transmit
knowledge about our !eld, including the creation of interdisciplinary educational departments and programs, scienti!c societies, conferences, and journals, our !eld still
faces a major literacy problem. Part of the reason for this
is that theoretical progress has been so fast that it has been
difficult to incorporate it into these institutions. A more
serious problem is that the deepest theoretical discoveries have been highly interdisciplinary and have uni!ed
knowledge about multiple levels of biological intelligence
using model neural architectures and their emergent psychological properties. The emergent properties of these
modal architectures follow from the dynamics of carefully chosen nonlinear systems of differential equations.
Unfortunately, most universities and scienti!c conferences
still do not, by and large, teach the range of interdisciplinary knowledge that is needed to link brain to mind on an
advanced level. Even today, although much less than in
the past, great experimental neuroscientists may be naïve
or dismissive about psychology, and conversely, since that
was not part of their own training. And most psychological and neurobiological experimentalists have little or no
training in mathematics or how to model. They are simply
unquali!ed to understand, or even to hold an informed
opinion about, the state of the art in mind-brain theory.
Since a lot of political power in psychology and neuroscience is held by experimentalists, this tends to warp how
the !eld evolves in a way that does not adequately exploit
important theoretical discoveries.
These limitations have led people who believe in Big
Data to suggest that nothing can be understood theoretically unless we !rst collect huge amounts of data about
every aspect of brain organization. Some neuroscientists
also believe that a model is not “realistic” unless it includes every fact from their own laboratories, irrespective
of whether these facts are rate-limiting in the explanation
and quantitative simulation of important databases about

mental functions. These beliefs are contradicted by the
cyclic and incremental nature of the modeling Method of
Minimal Anatomies depicted in Figure 2.37, and by the
huge amount of explanatory and predictive theoretical
success of the ensuing models over the past half century.
To overcome these unfounded beliefs, sustained tutorials about theoretical breakthroughs, as is often practiced
in theoretical physics, need to be scheduled into major
experimental conferences, workshops, and educational
programs, and adequately funded to enable theorists, experimentalists, and students of all persuasions to get an
opportunity to keep abreast of theoretical advances in our
most exciting !eld as its progress accelerates even more in
the years ahead.

From brain theories to
technological applications
There is one additional, and very important, feature of the
modeling cycle that needs to be described; namely, at every
stage of the modeling cycle, applications are spun off to
be used by engineers and technologists who are interested
in developing systems that are capable of increasingly autonomous intelligence and control (Figure 2.38). Why are
these mind-brain theories useful to technologists? Every
technological application needs both to identify a function
in the real world that an new application should handle, as
well as a mechanism with which to realize it. Neural networks that link brain to mind provide both mechanism
and function, respectively. Function is derived from the
psychological analyses that lead to the discovery of new
design principles, whereas mechanism is speci!ed within
the neural networks that are derived from these design
principles. Moreover, these neural networks are designed
to achieve autonomous adaptation in a changing world,
and increasing numbers of technological applications require such a competence.
I would argue, moreover, that the development of increasingly autonomous adaptive intelligent agents will
become the most important technological revolution of
our age, and that insights from biological intelligence will
play an increasingly vital role in these developments during
the next generation. Finally, unlike many psychological
and neurobiological experimentalists, engineers and technologists often have the mathematical and computational
training needed to be able to fluently read and understand
the mathematical equations that de!ne these neural networks, even if they may not know much about the psychological and neurobiological data that they explain.
Even in technology, however, there are conservative
tendencies, as indeed there should be. Engineers usually
want to use tried and true methods to solve their problems,

How a Brain Makes a Mind

FIGURE 2.38. Our models have been used in many large-scale
applications to engineering and technology. Linking brain to
behavior explains how brain mechanisms give rise to psychological functions, and do so autonomously. The combination of
mechanism, function, and autonomy helps to explain their value
in helping to solve outstanding problems in technology.

if only to ensure the reliability of their solutions. They do
not want their bridges or airplanes to fall down! However,
as increasing numbers of problems arise that are best
solved using autonomously intelligent systems that can
learn on the fly from huge databases that exhibit rapidly
changing statistics and unexpected events, the number of
tried and true methods to solve these problems becomes
vanishingly small. So new approaches need to be tried and
developed. Models that embody the brain’s superb autonomously intelligent capabilities are consequently becoming
increasingly used. Indeed, most of the government grants
that supported my research for over thirty years were

|

85

interested in discovering new brain designs for autonomous intelligence that could be applied to outstanding
technological problems. A lot of scientists, engineers, and
companies have used models that Gail Carpenter and I,
separately and together, developed with other colleagues
with this grant support for both scienti!c and large-scale
applications in technology. A partial list of applications
can be found on the CNS Technology website: http://
techlab.bu.edu/resources/articles/C5.
It is particularly exciting that some of the biggest
technology companies in the world, including Apple
and Google, are currently investing heavily in neural
networks. Much of that investment is going into trying
to solve various Big Data problems by applying Deep
Learning. As I noted above, Deep Learning uses the
learning algorithm of the earlier back propagation model,
which in turn uses a variant of the methods of steepest
descent that have been developed by mathematicians
since at least the time of Gauss. Thus, the mechanisms
that are used in back propagation and Deep Learning are
based on classical mathematical ideas. I therefore often
call them “neo-classical” models. It should therefore not
be a surprise that these models are not consistent with
mechanisms that are found in the brain, and that they
can experience catastrophic forgetting if they try to learn
too quickly, or in a too dense environment, or an environment whose statistics change rapidly and unpredictably.
Unfortunately, these properties are often found in realworld Big Data databases. When technology companies
fully face the challenges of realizing adaptive autonomous
intelligence in rapidly changing environments, my belief
is that they will then increasingly turn away from Deep
Learning to models like Adaptive Resonance Theory to
try to solve their Big Data problems.

