1
Overview
From Complementary Computing and
Adaptive Resonance to conscious awareness

Expectation, imagination, creativity, and
illusion
Just about everything that we know about our minds from daily life is mysterious. For
example, when you open your eyes in the morning, you usually see what you expect to
see. O!en it will be your bedroom, with things where you le! them before you went to
sleep. What if you opened your eyes and unexpectedly found yourself in a steaming
tropical jungle? or on top of a mountain during a blizzard? What a shock that would
be! Why do we have expectations about what is about to happen to us? Why do we
get surprised when something unexpected happens to us? More generally, why are we
Intentional Beings who are always projecting our expectations into the future and predicting what may happen next? How does having such expectations help us to fantasize
and plan events that have not yet occurred? Without this ability, all creative thought
would be impossible, and we could not imagine different possible futures for ourselves,
or our hopes and fears for them.
What is the difference between having a fantasy and experiencing what is really
there? What is the difference between illusion and reality? What goes wrong when we
lose control over our fantasies and hallucinate objects and events that are not really
there? Given that vivid hallucinations are possible, especially in mental disorders like
schizophrenia, how can we ever be sure that an experience is really happening and is
not just a particularly vivid hallucination? If there is a fundamental difference between
reality, fantasy, and illusion, then what is it?

Seeing, recognizing, and consciousness
Once you mention illusion, it is hard not to talk about consciousness. Our consciousness
of visual events is particularly vivid to us because we get so much information about the
Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN. Stephen Grossberg, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2021.
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780190070557.003.0001

1

2

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 1.1. The difference between seeing and recognizing.

world from our ability to see. But why do we bother to see?
One attractive hypothesis is that we see objects in order
to recognize them, so that we can then act upon them to
test our expectations or ful#ll our desires. But do we really
need to see something in order to recognize it? The answer,
strange as it may seem, is easily seen to be “no”.
For an example of this, look at the image in Figure 1.1
(right column). While looking at this image, we can all recognize that there is a vertical line, or boundary, of some sort that
is interpolated between the ends of the horizontal blue lines.
But we do not see this line, because it does not have a different
brightness or color from its background. It is invisible. Nor
does it separate the image into regions of different brightness
or color. Such a percept is o!en said to be amodal. In contrast,
a modal percept is one which does carry some visible brightness or color difference. Such visible percepts are o!en called
qualia. Modal percepts of qualia are the ones that we usually
have in mind when we talk about seeing the world.
The example of the offset grating shows that it is not necessary to see something in order to consciously recognize it.
Why, then, do we bother to see?! Once you start making observations like this, you realize that things are not what they
seem, and that we need a different way of thinking in order
to understand how we consciously experience the world.

states right down to the ground. Take away the qualia and
there is nothing there”. Figure 1.1 (right column) illustrates
that this is an incorrect, or at least overly simple, idea.
In Figure 1.1 (le! column), in contrast, the circle around
the bright disk is visible because the disk that it encloses
is brighter than the surrounding background brightness.
Both the percept of the invisible vertical boundary and of
the visible circular boundary are of interest because they
are visual illusions—they are not “really there” in the image.
Why can we recognize or see illusions? How much of what
we see is an illusion? Many Eastern thinkers have spoken
about the World-As-Illusion. How correct were they? Did
they think we see illusions for the right reasons? Moreover,
if our consciousness can include even such bizarre experiences as invisible and visible illusions, then why don’t we
get hopelessly confused between illusion and reality all the
time? Is there some adaptive property of our brains which
implies that we can be conscious of visual illusions, without
preventing us from experiencing visible “reality” quite well
most of the time? If so, what is this adaptive property? I will
summarize explanations of various such percepts in subsequent chapters, and will propose how they arise from adaptive properties of our brains that are needed for survival.
Before leaving this set of issues, consider the image in
Figure 1.2. This image reminds us that invisible boundaries can sometimes be very useful in helping us to recognize
visual objects in the world. Figure 1.2 shows the famous
example of a Dalmatian in snow. When we #rst look at this
picture, it may just look like an array of black splotches of
different sizes, densities, and orientations across the picture. Gradually, however, we can recognize the Dalmatian
in it as new boundaries form in our brain between the
black splotches. These emergent boundaries are visual illusions that are not in the image itself. They are created
in the visual cortex. Despite being illusory, and invisible!,

Illusion and reality
The percept that we get from Figure 1.1 (right column)
shows that we can recognize, and be conscious of, events
that are invisible. Many people, including distinguished
philosophers such as John Searle, have written about visual
consciousness as if it only includes consciousness-ofqualia, or of visible sensations. Thus Searle (1998, p. 1938)
wrote: “The problem of consciousness is identical with the
problem of qualia, because conscious states are qualitative

FIGURE 1.2. Dalmatian in snow.

Overview

these boundary groupings are very useful in enabling us
to recognize the dog in the picture. This percept illustrates
not only that we can consciously recognize invisible boundaries, but that this process of boundary completion and
grouping is o!en very useful as we encounter ambiguous
objects in the world. Chapters 3 and 4 will say more about
how both invisible and visible boundary groupings help us
to group incomplete fragments in scenes and pictures into
object boundaries that enable us to recognize the objects of
which these fragments form a part.

Art and movies are seen
with boundaries and
surfaces
For the moment, let me emphasize that the visual arts
and the entertainment industry depend greatly upon
such visual illusions. Whenever we look at a photograph,
painting, movie screen, or computer monitor, we respond
to a two-dimensional (2D) picture by constructing from it
a representation of a three-dimensional (3D) world—that
is, a world that is experienced in depth. The human urge
to represent the world using 2D pictures dates back at least
to Paleolithic times. Artists from ancient to modern times
have sought to understand how a few lines or color patches
on a flat surface can induce mental representations of multiple objects in a scene, notably of occluding objects in front
of the objects that they partially occlude. I will explain in
Chapter 11 how our ability to experience the world through
a picture, or a series of pictures in a movie, derives from
more basic properties of how we see the world in depth.
Figure 1.3 illustrates what I mean by the claim that percepts derived from pictures are o!en illusions. Figure 1.3
(le! column) shows three rectangular shapes that abut one
another. Our percept of this image irresistibly creates a
different interpretation, however. We perceive a horizontal
bar lying in front of a partially occluded vertical bar that
is amodally completed behind it. The alternative percept
of two rectangles abutting a horizontal bar is much less
frequent, although it provides a more literal description
of the image. The percept that is generated by inspecting

FIGURE 1.3. Amodal completion.

|

3

Figure 1.3 (le! column) is an example of figure-ground perception, whereby #gures in a scene are separated from one
another and their backgrounds, and completed.
Even this simple image raises fundamental questions:
Why do the horizontal edges that are shared by two abutting rectangles seem to “belong” to the horizontal bar?
This property is o!en called border ownership. When these
shared horizontal edges are attributed to the large horizontal bar, the vertical edges of the two small rectangles
are somehow detached from these horizontal edges. They
can then complete amodal vertical boundaries “behind”
the horizontal bar to connect the vertical edges of the two
abutting rectangles. These amodal vertical boundaries
connect the visible vertical boundaries of the two rectangles to form a percept of a partially occluded vertical bar,
as schematized in Figure 1.3 (right column).
How can a 2D picture generate a percept in which
something is behind something else? How do 2D pictures
create a percept in 3D, as they do whenever we see a movie?
How do these perceptual properties differ from classical
mathematical concepts of geometry? Answers to these
questions will be provided in Chapter 11. Whatever its origins, this sort of phenomenon is clearly essential for our
ability to recognize the world through pictures, and I will
explain how this happens later in the book.

From Helmholtz and Kanizsa
to Adaptive Resonance:
Unlikely and bistable
percepts
Figure 1.4 shows some other examples of how our brains
can interpret 2D pictures as events in three dimensions. The
images in the top row were described by the great Italian
psychologist Gaetano Kanizsa, who was one of the most insightful contributors to visual perception until his death in
1994. They are called stratification percepts for the following
reasons. As a two-dimensional picture, Figure 1.4 (le!
column) is just a white region on a black background. This
simple picture generates a percept of an occluding object in
front of an occluded object. It can be perceived either as a
white cross in front of a white outline square, or as a white
outline square in front of a white cross. The former percept
usually occurs, but the percept can intermittently switch between these two interpretations. When a percept can switch
spontaneously through time between two different interpretations, it is said to be a bistable percept.
Strati#cation percepts raise many questions: How
does the boundary of the cross get completed across the
white regions where it intersects the square? How does
the white color within the completed cross boundary get

4

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 1.4. (top row) Kanizsa stratification; (bottom row)
transparency images.

“captured” into a cross-shaped surface that is enclosed
by this boundary? How is this cross assigned to a depth
that is perceived to be closer than that of the square? How
does the rest of the white region get assigned to the square
at a more distant depth? How do the incomplete square
boundaries get amodally completed “behind” the cross to
facilitate recognition of the square? Why do not the completed square boundaries capture the white color within
them where they intersect the cross? In particular, why are
the square boundaries that are completed behind the cross
invisible?
When the percept switches, so that the square appears
in front of the cross, why do the completed square boundaries succeed in capturing the white color that previously
was attributed to the cross, whereas the completed cross
boundaries are then merely amodally completed behind
the square, and are invisible?
Why is the percept bistable? And why does the cross
percept win over the square percept more o!en?
One might at #rst think that such percepts arise because of prior learning about familiar objects in the world,
like crosses and squares. Although visual experiences do
influence how the brain develops and learns, and then how
it perceives, something different is going on when we perceive images such as those in Figure 1.4. Figure 1.4 (right
column) illustrates what I mean. In this #gure, two pairs
of vertical black lines create boundaries that help to capture the intervening white color into two vertical surface
regions that belong to the square. These vertical regions
are perceived to lie in front of the horizontal bars of the
cross all the time. The horizontal boundaries of the cross,
where it intersected the square, are now always amodally
completed behind the vertical square surface. No bistable
percept can any longer occur in this part of the #gure.
The effect of these black vertical lines influences
the percept only locally, however. When we look to the
middle of the picture, we see that the vertical bars of the
cross are still completed in front of the square, just as they
were in Figure 1.4 (le! column). These vertical bars of the

cross appear to lie in front of the square most of the time,
even though the horizontal bars of the cross appear to lie
behind the square. Kanizsa used this image to argue that
knowledge about the world does not determine such percepts because, surely, our many experiences with crosses
and squares should place the cross behind the square everywhere once it is forced to be behind the vertical bars
of the square. This is not, however, what we perceive. We
perceive, instead, the highly unlikely situation in which
the cross appears to be deformed to lie both in front and
in back of the square.
These simple #gures contributed to a long-standing
controversy about how we see and recognize the world
that has continued to the present time. The alternative
view, that we see what we expect to see because of prior
learning, also has a lot of evidence to support it. Hermann
von Helmholtz, one of the greatest scientists of the nineteenth century, proposed that we see using unconscious
inferences, or learned expectations (Helmholtz, 1866). A
modern variant of this viewpoint has been developed by
Bayesian modelers. From this Helmholtzian or Bayesian
perspective, the percept generated by Figure 1.4 (right
column) should be impossible.
In contrast, Kanizsa provided brilliant counterexamples to Helmholtz’s hypothesis using images, such as the
ones in Figure 1.4 (right column), that violate our learned
expectations. Kanizsa emphasized the power of bottomup visual processes, such as #ltering and perceptual
grouping, that act directly on visual scenes and images
at early stages of brain processing, whereas Helmholtz
emphasized the impact of top-down processes, such as
learned expectations, that are activated by processes
deeper in the brain and are matched against perceptual
representations that are formed by the more peripheral
bottom-up processes.
Both Helmholtz and Kanizsa were partly correct.
A more comprehensive understanding has arisen from
neural models that explain how bottom-up and top-down
processes work together to generate an attentive consensus, or adaptive resonance, between what is out there
in the world and what we expect to see based upon our
past experiences. I introduced a theory in 1976, called
Adaptive Resonance Theory, or ART, to explain how such
a consensus enables us to rapidly learn about a changing
world throughout life and become conscious of events as
we do so. These results from ART motivated the title of
this book. Helmholtz and Kanizsa could not fully make
these connections because they did not have some of the
critical intuitive concepts and none of the mathematics
needed to express them clearly. I am proud to be able to
say that all of the main predictions of ART have subsequently been supported by psychological and neurobiological data. Later chapters will use ART, among other neural
models, to explain the fascinating facts that have already
been mentioned, as well as many others.

Overview

Opaque vs. transparent:
Geometry vs. contrast
The strati#cation images in Figure 1.4 (top row) both generate opaque percepts. An opaque percept is one in which a
viewer cannot see behind an occluding surface, even when
a partially occluded object is amodally recognized behind
the occluder. Why do these, and indeed most, objects that
we see in the world look opaque?
I will explain how this happens in subsequent chapters.
For now, we need also to acknowledge from our daily experiences that some percepts are not opaque. For example,
when we look through a clear glass window, we can see
both the window and objects through the window that
are further away. Such percepts are said to be transparent.
Why are some percepts opaque and others transparent?
This is an important distinction for our brains to make, if
only because it can greatly influence both how we recognize objects in the world and how we reach and navigate
to acquire them.
The images in Figure 1.4 (bottom row) show how easy
it is to generate transparent percepts, and how perplexing
these percepts can be. Each of the three le!ward images in
this row has the same geometry, which is outlined within
the image in the rightmost column of this row. Each of
the three le!ward images is de#ned by different shades
of gray in their three visible regions. The middle image
exhibits a bistable transparent percept. Here, at different
times, the lower right square may appear closer than the
upper le! square, before the percept switches to one in
which the lower right square appears further away than
the upper le! square. Thus, this percept, just as the strati#cation percept in Figure 1.4 (upper row, le! column) is
bistable. On the other hand, because one can see one of
the squares behind the other one, each of these bistable
percepts is also transparent. In other words, just as in the
case of looking through clear glass, one can consciously
see two different surfaces, at different depths, and the
same positions, even though the actual image is a picture
in two dimensions.
The image in Figure 1.4 (lower row, left image) differs from the bistable transparent percept only in terms
of the relative contrasts of the gray shades in its three
defining regions. This difference is enough to create a
unimodal transparent percept in which the lower right
square always looks closer than the upper left one.
In this case, the positions that the two squares share
is always seen transparently behind the lower right
square.
Finally, the image in Figure 1.4 (lower row, third-fromle!) appears opaque and flat in the 2D pictorial plane. There
is no 3D percept here, whether opaque or transparent.

|

5

Why do not all occluding
objects look transparent?
Conscious seeing vs.
recognition
These examples illustrate how easily percepts of opacity or
transparency can be generated. They hereby raise the following basic question: Given that the boundaries of partially occluding objects can be completed behind their occluders, why do not all occluding objects look transparent?!
My proposed answer to this question will highlight a
profound conflict between the requirements of conscious
seeing and of recognition that the brain has solved. I will
suggest how this conflict is resolved in different regions of
the visual cortex, indeed through parallel and hierarchical
interactions between visual cortical areas V2 and V4. Once
one understands how the visual cortex resolves this conflict
to allow percepts of both opaque and transparent objects to
occur, with the outcome depending upon the global con#guration of all boundary groupings and surface contrasts,
as in response to the various images in Figure 1.4, then one
can explain many data about the link between seeing and
recognition that would otherwise remain quite mysterious.
This explanation is provided in Chapters 4 and 11.

Fast learning, slow
forgetting, exploration,
and culture
These discussions of visual percepts and illusions raise
the question of how much of what we perceive is due to
learning. An amazing fact about our lives is how much we
can learn, and how fast we can learn it. Just think about
your experiences at a crowded party, or an exciting movie.
At the party, you can meet a lot of new people, and remember their faces and a great deal of what you discussed
with them, especially if they arouse your interest and attention. The same is true when we go to the movies. Movie
scenes flash by very quickly, yet you can go home and tell
your friends and family a lot about what you experienced
in the movie theater. We can continue to learn like this
with remarkable rapidity throughout our lives.
A major question is thus: If we can learn so quickly,
then why don’t we forget just as quickly?
In particular, as I quickly learn new faces at a party,
why don’t I forget the familiar faces of friends and family
members just as quickly? Why doesn’t the memory of a

6

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

new face force out the memory of an old face? If this did
happen too easily, then we would be afraid to ever go to
a party or even out on the street. Any exploration of the
world in all its novelty could have devastating effects on
our present knowledge whenever we tried to learn something new. Of course, new experiences can re#ne and even
correct old knowledge. But this is not catastrophic forgetting, which could rapidly erase useful knowledge while we
are learning about unrelated things.

Balance, Complementary
Computing, and the
stability-plasticity dilemma
Our ability to learn quickly and stably is one of the most important cornerstones of our ability to learn a uni#ed sense
of self and to build the civilized communities in which we
live. Our intricate cultures, our knowledge of history, our
arts and sciences, and our burgeoning technologies would
be impossible without it. I call the problem of how we can
learn quickly without catastrophically forgetting our previously learned memories the stability-plasticity dilemma.
The stability-plasticity dilemma asks: How can our brains
be plastic and learn quickly about a changing world, without
losing the stability of our past memories? This is a question
of balance: Too much plasticity can lead to catastrophic
forgetting, while too much stability can lead to a rigid and
maladaptive adherence to previous knowledge and beliefs
that cannot adjust to a changing world. Maintaining this
balance is part of the “art of living”.
I will suggest below how many of the brain’s designs
for adaptive behavior are achieved by balancing between
two or more opposing, or complementary, processes whose
properties are related to each other in the much the same
way as a key #ts into a lock, or as pieces in a puzzle #t together. The way in which brains balance between stability
and plasticity is one example of this kind of Complementary
Computing. Due to this balance, our brains can rapidly
continue to learn about the world throughout life. We can
gradually become “experts” about our own experiences
and develop a sense of a self with a coherent personal history, without risking catastrophic forgetting.

Learning, expectation, and
attention
How do brains solve the stability-plasticity dilemma? In
order to do this, they need to be able to cope with a world
that floods us with new experiences. The great nineteenth
century American psychologist William James called this
the “blooming buzzing confusion” of daily life. Somehow

we bring order to this confusion. Paying attention to events
that interest us is a big help. But what does it mean to pay
attention? And what would go wrong if we couldn’t pay attention? For example, schizophrenics have a very hard time
paying attention, and they do feel flooded by the blooming
buzzing confusion of the world. Autistic individuals also
have difficulties paying attention, o!en focusing on speci#c details but not the overall meaning of an event.
How we pay attention is o!en driven by our expectations of what is about to happen. For example, if you expect
someone to be coming through a door, you may focus your
attention on the door to anticipate their arrival, and get
ready to see the person whom you are expecting. How does
having an expectation control the events to which we pay
attention? Why are our brains designed to learn expectations in the #rst place?
I will propose below how our ability to solve the stabilityplasticity dilemma—that is, to learn quickly throughout
life without catastrophic forgetting—depends upon our
ability to learn expectations about the world—that is, to
be Intentional Beings—and to use these expectations to
selectively pay attention to a small subset of events in the
world—that is, to be Attentional Beings. This perspective
emphasizes that most of our expectations are learned from
our unique experiences in life. These expectations, in turn,
o!en control the events to which we pay attention, by being
matched against the information that we get from the world,
and suppressing information that does not conform to these
expectations. For example, I might learn to expect where the
coat closet is in my house and attend to it selectively to hang
up my jacket when I come home, while ignoring the fact that
some furniture got moved since I le! home.
Taken together, these observations suggest that there
is a basic connection between the processes of learning,
expectation, and attention in our brains. In Chapter 5,
I will suggest what this connection is, why it exists, and
how it works, thereby clarifying why it is easier for us to
learn about events to which we pay attention. Chapter 5
will show how Adaptive Resonance Theory, or ART, explains what this connection is and how it works. Along the
way, I will also clarify why and how we see visual illusions,
and will suggest that these illusions derive from adaptive
mechanisms whereby we construct representations of reality that help us to solve the stability-plasticity dilemma.

Balancing expected vs.
unexpected events: Topdown vs. bottom-up
attention
Attention is not controlled only by our expectations. The
world is a blooming buzzing confusion in part because

Overview

surprising, or novel, events can occur. The world is always
changing, and we need to try to change with it, or may not
survive. In order to keep up with these changes, our attention
can also be captured by unexpected events. An unexpected
attack by a predator in the forest, for example, cannot be ignored without devastating consequences. These unexpected
events can automatically attract attention in a bottom-up
manner, driven directly by events in the world. They differ
from the top-down learned expectations that were earlier
mentioned. These bottom-up and top-down bids for attention interact to regulate whether learned plans can persist,
or not, against the momentary demands of current events.
How do we balance between the expected and the
unexpected? How do we try to satisfy our expectations,
yet also stay open and attentive to the demands of novel
events? I will also explain in Chapter 5 how our brains
maintain a balance between the expected and the unexpected, between the familiar and the novel, and thereby
solve the stability-plasticity dilemma. As I noted above,
this is just one of the ways in which the brain maintains
a balance between a pair of computationally complementary processes. It is a particularly important one because,
if we could not adapt to novel experiences and challenges,
we could not continue to learn new things throughout life.

Autonomous adaptation
in real time to a
changing world
This discussion illustrates a more general theme. Our
brains are designed to autonomously adapt to a changing
world. In other words, advanced brains can learn, on the
fly, in response to rapidly changing environments, and
can do so without any teacher but the world itself. Indeed,
brain circuits look the way they do, I claim, because their
design embodies a parsimonious solution to how an intelligent system can autonomously adapt to a changing world.
This assertion implies that any approach to understanding
biological intelligence that does not tackle the problem of
autonomous adaptation to a changing world will not #gure
out why brains look the way they do, or how they work.

Noise-saturation dilemma:
Balancing cooperation and
competition
An important implication of the brain’s complementary
organization is that no single brain process can solve a

|

7

large-scale problem like vision or speech. Each process has
its own strengths and weaknesses. When these processes
interact with one another in a balanced way, they can together overcome each other’s complementary de#ciencies.
Our study of these various types of balance will suggest
a new way to think about philosophical ideas about balance throughout history, notably Eastern ideas such as Yin
vs. Yang. This insight helps to clarify why concepts like
this about ourselves and the world have arisen in multiple
cultures.
A related question concerns how the complementarity
organization of our brains may be related to complementarity properties of the physical world. I will discuss this
more in Chapter 17. For the moment, I will note that the
Principle of Complementarity was advanced by the great
Nobel Prize-winning Danish physicist Niels Bohr in the
1920s during his epochal work that founded quantum
mechanics. This Principle explains that objects have complementary properties, such as position and momentum,
or wave and particle. To the present, major discoveries
about how brains make minds have not required the use
of quantum mechanics, if only because the brain seems to
work at a macroscopic level. However, the brain is a kind of
universal measurement system of many kinds of physical
processes, including light, sound, heat, and pressure. This
fact raises the question of whether, and if so, how, brains
may have assimilated into their own structure basic physical principles during their ceaseless interactions with the
physical world throughout evolution.
The brain’s complementary processes typically involve different ways in which cells cooperate and compete.
Darwin’s Theory of Natural Selection describes how cooperative and competitive processes during evolution may
determine the survival of species. Cooperation and competition are also built into each of our brain’s circuits. There
is a basic reason why these processes exist on all levels of
biological organization: Cooperation and competition
solve a ubiquitous problem that I call the noise-saturation
dilemma, which all living cells, not only brain cells, need
to solve. This problem concerns how brains process distributed patterns of inputs across large networks of cells.
Such a distributed input pattern may, for example, represent the pixels of a scene or the spectrogram of a voice.
These distributed input patterns from the world input to
networks of feature-selective neurons. Each such neuron
can respond selectively to some features, but not others.
Multiple stages of such feature-selective processing exist
throughout each brain. The relative input sizes typically
provide a measure of the importance of that feature in the
input pattern (Figure 1.5, top row, le! column).
The noise-saturation dilemma arises because each cell
can respond using only a #nite, indeed very small, range
of activity levels, or potentials (Figure 1.5, top row, right
column). Without oscilloscopes that greatly amplify cell
potentials, their fluctuations would be essentially invisible

8

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 1.5. Noise-saturation dilemma.

to the naked eye. For example, oscilloscopes played a critical role in the work for which H. Keffer Hartline won the
Nobel Prize in 1967 for his studies, beginning in the 1930s,
of the Limulus polyphemus, or horseshoe crab, retina.
Without the amplifying power of an oscilloscope, these pioneering studies could not have visualized the responses
to light of Limulus retinal neurons.
Because of the #nite dynamic range of neuronal responses, if an input to a neuron becomes too large, then
the activity of this cell could, in principle, saturate at its
maximum activity (Figure 1.5, bottom row, le! column).
When the input to a neuron is too small, then the activity
of this cell can, in principle, get lost in internal cellular
noise (Figure 1.5, bottom row, right column). Despite this
limitation, cells that receive hundreds or even thousands
of inputs from other cells—inputs that can individually vary in their amplitude through time between their
minimum and maximum sizes—can process distributed patterns of these variable-size inputs without being
unduly contaminated by noise or saturation, as in Figure
1.5 (top row, le! column). I will explain in Chapter 2 how
the noise-saturation dilemma may be solved in all cellular
networks, not just neural networks, by using cooperation
and competition.
Given that cooperation and competition are ubiquitous in our brains, it is perhaps not surprising that our
brains have evolved ingenious ways for networks of neurons to cooperate and compete to carry out many different
kinds of functions. This fact raises all sorts of questions
about competition and cooperation: Is cooperation better
than competition? When is competition a good thing, and
when is it bad? As I will illustrate below, both cooperation and competition are necessary for either process to
work well, just as wherever there is light, expect also to see
a shadow. Properly balanced cooperative and competitive
processes solve the stability-plasticity dilemma and help
us in myriad ways to rapidly adapt to a changing world.

Imbalanced cooperation and competition can cause serious problems, including epileptic seizures, just as other
kinds of system imbalances can lead to mental disorders
such as autism and schizophrenia.
There is also growing evidence that variants of the
same cooperative and competitive mechanisms that the
brain has evolved may occur in society, indeed across the
entire living world, and that imbalances in these cooperative and competitive processes may also lead to maladaptive outcomes. Chapter 17 summarizes the fact that
brain dynamics illustrate a universal developmental code
that holds for all living cellular tissues, whether neural or
not. This result about brains contributes to a mathematical
foundation for a general science of cooperation and competition that may become as important for our personal
survival as it is for the survival of the societies in which we
live. To #x ideas, let me mention the following examples
right away:

Short-term memory,
working memory, and
long-term memory
We all have the capacity for working memory. This is the
sort of temporary memory whereby if, say, I tell you a
friend’s telephone number. you can store it temporarily
in memory before dialing it on your telephone. Suppose,
however, that I distract you before you dial the phone, or
you trip and fall before doing so. Then you may have to ask
me to tell you the number again, because it has been wiped
out, or reset, by the distraction. Working memory is thus
a type of short-term memory. It can easily be reset and forgotten when we are distracted. Working memory is shortterm memory for sequences of items, or events. Short-term
memory differs from long-term memory, which is the type
of memory whereby you can remember your own name.
This latter type of memory is not forgotten due to a momentary distraction.
Whether we learn to understand and speak a language,
solve a mathematics problem, cook an elaborate meal, or
merely dial a phone number, multiple events in a speci#c
temporal order must somehow be stored temporarily in
working memory, a!er which they can be recalled at variable speeds from this working memory when we want
to do so. As event sequences are temporarily stored, they
can also be grouped through learning into plans, and can
later be performed from these plans, again at variable
rates under volitional control. These learned plans are also
called list chunks. How these processes work remains one
of the most important types of problems confronting cognitive scientists and neuroscientists.

Overview

Neural models that my colleagues and I have developed propose how sequences of events are temporarily
stored in working memories and then coded and rehearsed
either directly from working memory, or from learned list
chunks. Remarkably, for reasons that will be explained in
Chapter 12, similar brain circuit designs are used for linguistic, spatial, and motor working memories. Linguistic
working memory may store a telephone number, or other
speech, language, or musical utterances. Spatial working
memories may store sequences of navigational movements, such as movements that enable us to learn routes to
home, school, or work. Finally, motor working memories
may store sequences of skilled actions, ranging from the
example above of cooking an elaborate meal, to writing or
typing, or playing a sport or musical instrument.
In all of these cases, as a sequence of items is seen or heard
through time, each item in the sequence activates cells that
are selectively responsive to that item. As the sequence is experienced through time, a spatial pattern of activity emerges
across these responsive cells. In other words, “time” is recoded by “space”. If the items are stored in the correct temporal order, then the #rst item will have the largest activity,
the second item the next largest activity, and so on, thereby
generating what is called a primacy gradient (Figure 1.6).
In order to maintain its activity in working memory
until rehearsal occurs, each activated cell sends itself an excitatory feedback signal. If nothing else happened, these excitatory feedback signals could drive all active cells to their
maximal activities, as shown in Figure 1.5 (bottom row, le!
column), thereby destroying the primacy gradient. This is
prevented by inhibitory, or competitive, feedback signals
from each active cell to all the other cells in the network.
These inhibitory feedback signals are balanced against
the excitatory feedback signals. Such a network is called
a recurrent (or feedback) on-center (self-excitatory) offsurround (other-inhibitory) network (Figure 1.6). On-center

FIGURE 1.6. Primacy gradient of activity stored in working
memory within a recurrent shunting on- center off-surround
network. Rehearsal is controlled by a nonspecific rehearsal wave
and self-inhibitory feedback of the item that is currently being
rehearsed. Green = excitatory, red = inhibitory.

|

9

off-surround networks occur ubiquitously in our brains. In
particular, whether such networks are recurrent or nonrecurrent (feedforward), they have remarkable properties
when they connect cells that obey the laws that are found in
neurophysiological experiments. These laws are called the
membrane equations of neurophysiology, or shunting laws.
In Chapter 2, I will derive neural laws for solving the
noise-saturation dilemma using a simple gendanken, or
thought, experiment. Along the way, I will also review
three of the main historical modeling traditions that
preceded this discovery. This explanation clari#es that
shunting on-center off-surround networks may also be described in a language that talks about mass action (instead
of shunting) cooperative-competitive (instead of on-center
off-surround) networks. Such networks are found in all
cellular tissues, not only in the brain, in order to solve the
noise-saturation dilemma. I will return in Chapter 17 to
a more general account of how such laws permeate the
bodies of all cellular organisms, not just their brains.

Volition, rehearsal, and
inhibition-of-return
Rehearsal of stored activities in a working memory is initiated
when we want to recall its stored sequence. This volitional act
triggers a rehearsal wave that is sent with equal activity to all
the cells in the working memory (Figure 1.6). The rehearsal
wave opens gates that enable the various stored activities to
be read out of the working memory. The most active cell gets
rehearsed #rst because it exceeds its output threshold #rst,
the next most active cell is rehearsed next, and so on. Each
rehearsed item is prevented from being rehearsed over and
over again by self-inhibiting its activity in working memory
as it is rehearsed (Figure 1.6), thereby enabling the next
most active item to be rehearsed, and so on until the entire
sequence is performed. This kind of self-inhibition is o!en
called inhibition of return since it lasts long enough to enable
other items in the list to be rehearsed. In all, if the items are
stored in a primacy gradient, and if they receive a rehearsal
wave and self-inhibit as they are rehearsed, then the stored
sequence can be recalled in the stored temporal order.

Cooperative-competitive
dynamics: Stable
economic markets and
the Invisible Hand
I proved several mathematical theorems in the 1970s about
how such recurrent on-center off-surround networks should

10

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

be designed in order to exhibit useful properties that I will
explain below; e.g., Grossberg (1973). I also proved theorems
about more general classes of cooperative-competitive systems that included the recurrent on-center off-surround
networks as a special case; e.g., Grossberg (1978d, 1978e).
I called one such class of systems Adaptation Level
Systems because each of these systems has a “adaptation
level” that is equally experienced by every population in
the network. Adaptation Level Systems illustrate how a
collectively useful property can emerge from system interactions that permit a considerable amount of local
freedom of choice if there are communal understandings
that constrain the behavior of every actor in the system.
This communal understanding in these systems takes the
form of a state-dependent adaptation level against which
individual differences are compared to determine subsequence choices by these individuals. In the case of STM
storage in a neuronal network, the adaptation level is the
broad recurrent off-surround that inhibits all the competing cell populations. In the case of an economic market
where many #rms compete to produce the same product,
it is the publicly known market price.
Given the adaptation level constraint, I was able to
prove that the dynamics of all Adaptation Level Systems
are stable in the sense that all of its populations converge
through time to one of possibly in#nitely many equilibrium states. In the case of a neuronal network, this means
that an input pattern is stably stored in STM. I will explain
what it means in an economic market in a moment.
Before doing so, I want to note that another name was
given to the Adaptation Level System theorem by Morris (or
Moe) Hirsch, who liked to call it the ABC Theorem because
all of these systems could be de#ned by terms that I denoted
by the letters A, B, and C. Term C is the adaptation level,
whereas terms A and B may differ for every population in the
network. Moe Hirsch is a famous American mathematician
at the University of California at Berkeley who got interested
in the theorem and its possible generalizations, and proved
some interesting results about them; e.g., Hirsch (1982).
The ABC Theorem let me propose how similar mathematical properties could be used to derive surprising
conclusions about other disciplines, such as economics
and politics. Why should it be plausible that conclusions
about the brain may have possible analogs in economics
and politics? The main reason is that recurrent on-center
off-surround networks illustrate much more general principles of cooperation and competition that are found at
multiple organizational levels in the biological world.
The fact that humans share cooperative and competitive
design principles that occur throughout the biological
world helps to clarify how humans have been able to increasingly well understand this world and our place in it.
As Albert Einstein famously noted: “The most incomprehensible thing about the world is that it is comprehensible”.

The fact that our design principles are shared across all
living things, and even embody physical principles of nonliving things, helps to explain why this is true.
As I just briefly noted, one special case of the ABC
Theorem provides a novel insight into how to design a
stable economic market. This example illustrates how an
arbitrary number of #rms competing in a market can
achieve price stability and balanced books, even if the
#rms have only their own sel#sh interests in mind, and
even if they have only very indirect information about
each other in terms of the publicly reported market price,
a price that is influenced by all the #rms’ different business
strategies, which are known only to themselves.
The ABC Theorem hereby provides a rigorous example
of the Invisible Hand that Adam Smith described in his
classical 1776 book The Wealth of Nations (Smith, 1776).
Smith wrote:
“By preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; and by
directing that industry in such as manner as its produce
may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain,
and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible
hand to promote an end which was no part of his intention
. . . By pursuing his own interest he frequently promotes
that of the society more effectually than when he really intends to promote it”.
In particular, the theorem describes an economic market
wherein any number of companies make the same
product, and producing more of the product by any company tends to drive the market price of the product down.
Suppose that each of these companies has totally different
operating characteristics, and that the only information
that they have about each other is the indirect effect that
their strategies have on the aggregate market price, which
is publicly known. Suppose in addition, and this is the critical assumption, that each company agrees to make more
of the product at any given time only if it will make a net
pro#t at that time by doing so; that is, only if the momentary market price exceeds the total cost per item of the
product for their particular company, where the total cost
factors in costs of investment, production, saving, etc. that
are unique to each company. Under these very weak conditions, the theorem proves that, as time goes on, the market
price will become stable and all the companies will balance their books!
Remarkably, the ABC Theorem assures a stable market,
even though the companies aim to only make their own
pro#ts, and know very little about each other except
through the total effect of all the companies’ production
strategies on the publicly known market price. This kind
of result illustrates how cooperative and competitive interactions, whether in a market economy or a brain network,
can generate emergent properties that can be both useful
and surprising.

Overview

Although the theorem assures market stability, it does
not predict which companies will become rich and which
will go out of business. Further information would be
needed to predict that.

Free markets?
The theorem should not be interpreted as arguing for a free
market wherein competition can take its course without
any constraints. Emphatically not! It was mathematically
proved by the brilliant American mathematician Stephen
Smale in 1976, while he was on the faculty of the University
of California at Berkeley, that the class of all competitive
systems can generate any conceivable dynamics, including
generating the worst instabilities that one can imagine
(Smale, 1976). Smale hereby showed, 200 years a!er Adam
Smith’s famous book, that competition can lead to very
different consequences than the Invisible Hand. A truly
free economic market can, in fact, lead to catastrophic
consequences. Perhaps it is no coincidence that Hirsch
and Smale were also close colleagues who wrote a famous
textbook about dynamical systems in 1976, which is still
in use today, in a later edition, with one of my colleagues
at Boston University, Robert Devaney, as a third co-author
(Hirsch, Smale, and Devaney, 2012).
The ABC Theorem illustrates that, among the myriad
possible dynamical behaviors of cooperative and competitive systems, some of them have useful properties. Nature
has discovered such systems during Evolution, and it is our
task, as theorists, to #gure out what they are. In the particular
case of an economic market, the ABC Theorem
teaches us that, if all competing companies are
willing to play according to self-serving rules,
like producing more of a commodity only if it
will generate a pro#t, then important properties
for the entire market, such as market stability
and balanced books, can still be achieved.

|

11

alter the activity patterns that the network stores. These
stored patterns resemble some key features of “totalitarianism”, or “socialism”, or “democracy” (Figure 1.7). The
quotes are intended to emphasize that these simple examples are little more than amusing caricatures of some key
differences between these political systems.
For example, in the totalitarianism example, the signal
function is faster-than-linear (Figure 1.7, bottom row). In
other words, as the activity of a population increases, the
strength of its self-excitatory signal and its inhibitory signals to other populations increase even faster. Here, the
population with the largest initial activity competes to win
all the network activity (“winner-take-all”) and suppresses
everyone else’s activity. The dictator gets it all!
In the socialism example, the signal function is slowerthan-linear (Figure 1.7, middle row). In other words, as the
activity of a population increases, the strength of its signals increase more slowly. Here, no matter how big the initial advantages are of some populations, every population
ends up with the same activity. Here, it doesn’t pay to work
harder, because everyone will end up the same.
In the democracy example, the signal function is linear
(Figure 1.7, top row). In other words, as the activity of a
population increases, the strengths of its signals increase
proportionally. Here the relative sizes of the initial population activities continue to be preserved through time, so
everyone gets a fair piece of the pie.
One might conclude from these alternatives that (pure)
democracy is the way to go. However, I haven’t yet told you
the entire story: Both the socialism and democracy examples have the disadvantage of amplifying noise, or small

Cooperative
and competitive
dynamics: Democracy,
totalitarianism, and
socialism
Another special case of the ABC Theorem has a
political interpretation. In this example, changing the shape of the signals that are used to communicate among competing groups, without
making any other changes in the network, can

FIGURE 1.7. The choice of signal function f determines how an initial activity
pattern will be transformed and stored in short-term memory. Among linear,
slower-than-linear, and faster-than-linear signal functions, only the last one can
suppress noise. It does so as it chooses the population that receives the largest input for storage, while suppressing the activities of all other population,
thereby giving rise to a winner-take-all choice.

12

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

activities, in the network’s cells, individuals, or populations.
As a result, large activities can be caused in cells whose only
inputs are internal or external sources of small amounts of
noise. In the three cases described in Figure 1.7, only totalitarianism does not amplify noise, but totalitarianism is a
huge cost to pay for noise suppression!
The above properties hereby raise the following basic
question: Is there a way to design the system to suppress
noise without leading to a winner-take-all, or “totalitarian”, outcome? Fortunately for all of us, the answer is
Yes. Here is the simplest way to do this:

Sigmoid signals enable
noise suppression without
winner-take-all choice
Any signal function that can suppress noise needs to be
faster-than-linear at small activities (Figure 1.7). In addition, every biologically realistic signal function needs to
have a #nite maximal at large activities, because “in#nity
does not exist in biology”. The simplest continuous signal
function that combines these properties is a sigmoid, or Sshaped, signal function (Figure 1.8), which is faster-thanlinear at small activities, approximately linear at intermediate activities, and slower-than-linear at large activities.
Using a sigmoid signal function, which is found ubiquitously in the brain, leads to the following good properties:
The network suppresses noise, and consequently enhances
the initial differences between population activities (a
moment of “totalitarianism”). This latter property is called
contrast enhancement. Then the approximately linear part
of the signal function preserves these enhanced differences
through time (a moment of “democracy”), so that winnertake-all “totalitarianism” does not occur. Instead, a subset
of the populations with the largest initial activities survives
the competition with contrast-enhanced activities.
In summary, a kind of hybrid system works best. It
isn’t “pure” democracy, but it trades the bene#ts of noise

FIGURE 1.8. A sigmoid signal function is a hybrid signal that
combines the best properties of faster-than-linear, linear, and
slower-than-linear signals. It can suppress noise and store a partially contrast- enhanced activity pattern.

suppression against the fact that some individuals or populations will bene#t more than others due to contrast enhancement. As illustrated in Figure 1.9, a sigmoid signal
function creates a quenching threshold: Activities that start
out above this threshold are contrast-enhanced and stored
in short-term memory. Activities that start out below this
threshold are suppressed as noise. A quenching threshold
can be dynamically tuned. Increasing the quenching
threshold can enable a winner-take-all choice to be made.
Decreasing it can enable more features to be stored for further contextual processing, without risking that noise will
be ampli#ed.
More sophisticated variations of these networks have
also been studied. For example, a “rich get richer” phenomenon is realized by endowing some populations with
bigger parameters than others. In such a network, individuals or populations that have structural advantages, such
as bigger signals to other populations, or more cells, can
suck the activity out of the other populations. This kind
of phenomenon occurs in our brains as well. For example,
due to our experiences with lots of vertically and horizontally oriented structures in an urban environment, the cells
that represent these orientations may have stronger representations in visual cortical maps. As a result, the orientations of lines that are close to vertical or horizontal
may be perceived, during sustained viewing, as closer to
these “norms”. This kind of line neutralization effect was
reported by James Gibson and Minnie Radner in 1937
(Gibson and Radner, 1937), along with a related effect
called the tilt aftereffect by which an objectively vertical
or horizontal orientation later appears to be tilted in the
opposite direction. My PhD student Daniel Levine and I
explained and simulated how these effects can occur in an
article that we published in 1976 (Grossberg and Levine,
1976). Competitive systems can also oscillate in complicated ways if they are not properly designed, and can even
support chaotic dynamics.
Although these examples are too simple to describe realistic economic and political interactions in today’s societies,
they do begin to identify some of cooperative and competitive principles that need to be incorporated into more realistic models. Of more immediate interest is the fact that we
can understand such cooperative and competitive processes
on multiple levels of biological and social organization in
part because similar processes are built into our brains.

Cooperative-competitivelearning dynamics: ART in
the brain and technology
Such mathematical insights about cooperative and competitive dynamics, when combined with analyses of how

Overview

|

13

general-purpose properties that are needed to solve
the stability-plasticity dilemma in many different
types of environments. In all these applications,
insights about cooperative-competitive dynamics
also play a crucial role.

Cognition and emotion:
Male or female?
One of the hardest things to understand in our daily
lives is how best to balance cognition and emotion.
FIGURE 1.9. A sigmoid signal function generates a quenching threshFor many years, cultural theorists in the West argued
old below which cell activities are treated like noise and suppressed.
that men are innately endowed with reason and
Activities that are larger than the quenching threshold are contrast
enhanced and stored in short-term memory.
logic, whereas women are dominated by emotions
and passions. Such ideas were used to rationalize
why men should hold most of the power in Western
biological learning works, have been used extensively both
societies,
whereas women should devote themselves to
to better understand how brains give rise to minds, and
the
home,
where they were denied such basic rights as
to apply these systems in technology. For example, as I
the
right
to
a decent education or to vote. The classical
noted above, I introduced Adaptive Resonance Theory, or
book,
Wittgenstein’s
Vienna, by Allan Janik and Stephen
ART, in 1976 to solve the stability-plasticity dilemma and
Toulmin
brilliantly
summarizes
variants of these beliefs
to thereby explain how humans learn to attend, recognize,
in
Viennese
society
before
World
War I, as well as during
and predict objects and events in the world. ART has been
other
historical
epochs
(Janik
and
Toulmin, 1973). Such
progressively developed with many collaborators into
views
of
women
persist
in
many
societies
today.
the most advanced cognitive and neural theory that curA
more
nuanced
view
is
suggested
by
how our brains
rently has the broadest explanatory and predictive range.
are
actually
designed
to
use
cognitive
and
emotional proChapter 5 will explain how ART works, and will derive it
cesses.
Whereas
cognitive
processes
help
us to acquire
from a thought experiment.
knowledge
about
the
world,
emotional
processes
have a
Gail Carpenter has played a key role in developing
crucial
selective
role
that
helps
us
to
learn
and
use
that
ART, notably many ART algorithms that have been apknowledge
to
achieve
valued
goals
in
the
world,
notably
plied in technology. Many other scientists and engineers
to seek out rewarding experiences and to avoid punishing
have also applied ART in a wide variety of applications,
ones. Interactions between cognitive and emotional proincluding airplane design, medical database diagnosis
cesses, within each individual, enable us to learn how to
and prediction, remote sensing and geospatial mappay attention to events that have important valued conping and classi#cation, multidimensional data fusion,
sequences for us, and to decide which events cause these
classi#cation of data from arti#cial sensors with high
consequences and which are accidental. Cognitive and
noise and dynamic range (synthetic aperture radar, laser
emotional processes thus need to interact in every brain,
radar, multi-spectral infrared, night vision), speakerwhether male or female, in order to help us to attain goals
normalized speech recognition, automatic rule extracthat we value, or indeed to even survive. Chapter 13 is detion and hierarchical knowledge discovery, machine
voted to explaining how this happens.
vision and image understanding, mobile robot controlSocial norms that promote a healthy balance between
lers, satellite remote sensing image classi#cation, sonar
these
two kinds of brain processes continue to evolve, with
classi#cation, musical analysis, electrocardiogram wave
problems
continuing to the present day. One has only to
recognition, prediction of protein secondary structure,
note
articles
like those of Andrew Reiner on April 4, 2016
strength prediction for concrete mixes, tool failure monin
the
New
York
Times on the topic “Teaching men to be
itoring, chemical analysis from ultraviolet and infrared
emotionally
honest”
to realize that this struggle is not over
spectra, design of electromagnetic systems, face rec(Reiner,
2016).
Perhaps
increasing knowledge about how
ognition, familiarity discrimination, and power transcognition
and
emotion
each
contribute to the proper funcmission line fault diagnosis. Some of these applications
tioning
of
the
brain
will
make
it easier for individuals to
are listed in the techlab.bu.edu web page. This range of
#nd
such
a
balance
in
themselves.
applications is possible because ART models embody

14

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Causality, superstition,
and gambling: Classical
conditioning and prediction
Examples of cognitive-emotional interactions are ubiquitous. For example, few of us would say that the wallpaper
on a dining room wall causes food to appear on the dining
room table, even though it is present whenever food is
served. On the other hand, if you went into the dining room
only when food was served, you might very well associate
the distinctive wallpaper in the dining room with eating.
In fact, many superstitious societal rituals, such as rain
dances, or primitive medical practices that may do more
harm than good, may have arisen throughout history due
to accidental correlations between events. Even a low probability of reward can, under the proper circumstances, lead
some people to indulge in superstitious behaviors, maintain unhealthy relationships, become chronic gamblers, or
even pursue fetishistic and self-punitive behaviors.
How our brains manage to do as well as they do in
distinguishing between causal and accidental correlations between events has been scienti#cally studied since
at least the great Russian psychologist and physiologist
Ivan Pavlov carried out experiments about how dogs learn
in response to rewards and punishments (Pavlov, 1927).
Because of Pavlov’s seminal role, this particular type of
learning is o!en called Pavlovian conditioning, or classical conditioning. The word “conditioning” refers to the
type of reinforcement learning that occurs in experiments
of this type. Many other scientists subsequently added to
Pavlov’s insights, notably the American psychologist Leon
Kamin in the 1960s. I will use examples from Pavlovian
conditioning to make a number of general points about
cognition and emotion that are also true in many situations from daily life. The Pavlovian paradigm is a convenient source of examples because it is so simple, and because
its lessons generalize so broadly. Chapter 13 will describe
these processes and their properties in greater detail.
During a typical Pavlovian conditioning experiment,
a dog or other animal is presented with a rewarding or
punishing event, such as food or shock, respectively. Such
an event causes an array of emotional responses, such as
fear reactions in the case of shock. Suppose that a sensory
event like a brief buzzer sound precedes the shock on every
learning trial. At #rst, the buzzer may have no emotional
consequences. However, a!er “conditioning” or learning
occurs, presentation of the buzzer by itself can evoke fear.
In order to describe this kind of learning in many situations, the shock is called an unconditioned stimulus, or
US, because it elicits fear without any conditioning. The
fearful response is called an unconditioned response, or
UR, because shock can elicit it without conditioning. The
buzzer is called a conditioned stimulus, or CS, because

conditioning gives it some properties of the US. The response to the buzzer a!er conditioning occurs is called a
conditioned response, or CR. In this case, the CR would
include aspects of the fearful response that was originally
caused by the shock. The UR and CR are distinguished
because the CS may not learn to trigger all the effects of
the US.
Classical conditioning is a much more subtle process
than this example would suggest. For example, if pairing
a CS and US was the only thing that could happen during
conditioning, then pairing of the wallpaper in the dining
room with food would lead us to learn that wallpaper predicts food. However, this is not the only process that regulates classical conditioning, or any other kind of learning.
Indeed, the wallpaper is still in the dining room when we
pass through it between meals, and are not fed then. Thus,
unlike the buzzer, which may always precede shock, the
wallpaper can become an irrelevant, or redundant, stimulus that is not reliably associated with food. Models of
Pavlovian conditioning, such as the Cognitive-EmotionalMotor, or CogEM, model that I will describe in Chapter 13,
clarify how we learn which combinations of events predict
valued consequences, and which other events are predictively irrelevant, and thus are not attended or learned about.
I introduced CogEM in 1971 (Grossberg, 1971a) and it has
been progressively developed with many gi!ed collaborators up to the present time, including recent contributions
that clarify how particular brain dysfunctions may lead
to behavioral symptoms of amnesia and autism (Franklin
and Grossberg, 2017; Grossberg, 2017a; Grossberg and
Kishnan, 2018; Grossberg and Seidman, 2006).
CogEM includes a cognitive-emotional resonance that
embodies conscious knowledge of what events led to a certain emotional response, the emotional response itself, the
motivation to carry out responses that can acquire a valued
goal, and the learned action needed to achieve that goal.
Such a cognitive-emotional resonance focuses motivated
attention upon sensory cues that predict a valued consequence while suppressing those that do not, and thereby
enable these cues to control an action that can achieve the
goal. This cognitive-emotional resonance was part of the
inspiration that led to my #rst major publication about
Adaptive Resonance Theory, or ART, in 1976, for reasons
that will now be clari#ed.
The motivated attention that selects predictive cues
and suppresses irrelevant ones during a cognitiveemotional resonance regulates how we learn affective
consequences of a particular class of objects or events,
without experiencing catastrophic forgetting, while
supporting conscious recognition of the attended object
and our feelings about it. This was the first kind of
resonance that I discovered which solves the stabilityplasticity dilemma. Chapter 13 will explain how such
a cognitive- emotional resonance works, along with the
learning processes that it controls.

Overview

During learning to recognize a perceptual object, a
feature-category resonance enables us to learn a recognition category that selectively responds to critical features
of an attended object while suppressing irrelevant features,
thereby again preventing catastrophic forgetting, while
supporting conscious recognition, or knowing, what the
attended object is. I will explain how a feature-category
resonance works in Chapter 5. These two types of resonances support conscious feeling and knowing, respectively, as explained in the CogEM and ART models. When
these resonances synchronize, we can both recognize and
have feelings about objects in the world.

Predicting what happens
next in a changing world:
Blocking and unblocking
More complex conditioning experiments, called attentional blocking, or overshadowing, experiments, shed
more light on how we learn what events are predictive, or
causal, and what events are not. For example, suppose, as
in Figure 1.10 (le! column), that a buzzer sound (CS1) is
paired with a shock (US) until we are afraid of this sound.
On subsequent learning trials, suppose that, before the
shock occurs, the buzzer sounds at the same time that a
light flashes (CS2). Under these circumstances, we do not
usually become afraid of the flashing light, because it does
not predict any consequence that the buzzer sound alone
did not already predict. In other words, the flashing light
is predictively irrelevant, and is thus attentionally blocked,
just like the wallpaper in the dining room is.
On the other hand, suppose that whenever the flashing
light occurs with the buzzer sound, the intensity of the
subsequent shock (US2) is much greater than when the
buzzer sound occurs alone. Then we do learn to become
afraid of the buzzer sound, because it predicts an increase
in shock. If, instead, the intensity of the second shock is
much less than when the buzzer sound occurs alone, then
a wave of relief may be experienced. The process whereby
the CS2 becomes predictively relevant is called unblocking.
Blocking and unblocking experiments show that
humans and many other animals behave like minimal
adaptive predictors. We learn to focus our attention upon
events that predict important affective consequences,
while ignoring other events, at least until an unexpected
consequence occurs.
This fact raises fascinating philosophical issues, because each of us may learn, as a result of our own unique
experiences, that a different combination of events causes
the same consequence. For example, different people
might attend to different combinations of visual features

|

15

before naming an object a chair. Unless we experience
unexpected consequences in our use of chairs, due to erroneous irrelevant features, or events, that influence our
behaviors with chairs, we might believe that these irrelevant features predict what chairs are and how to use them.
We could, in such a world, learn to worship wallpaper as
the source of our food.
It is both interesting, and unsettling, to contemplate
that each of us may have learned unique rules whereby to
predict similar outcomes, and can live for years—indeed
for an entire lifetime!—with a wrong set of rules to determine our behaviors. To protect us against this possibility,
at least much of the time, we learn to pay more attention to
novel events (like the flashing light) when unexpected consequences (like the increase in shock) occur. Only through
experiencing enough unexpected consequences can we
narrow the #eld of possible causes, and learn to pay attention to truly predictive events.

The value of being wrong
Making mistakes is one of the most important ways that
we can generate unexpected consequences. Errors test
our hypotheses about how the world works, and enable us
to learn to discriminate between truly causal events and
merely superstitious beliefs. The desire to be “perfect” all
the time—to diligently avoid making any mistakes—can
thus be a double-edged sword. Although it may provide
short-term reassurance and praise, it can also chain us
to a narrow world, devoid of adventure, that #xates us
at our present level of ignorance, and locks out real personal growth. Taking measured risks is one way to #nd
out what is “really going on” and to broaden the world in
which we can learn to thrive. Kathryn Schulz published
a stimulating book on Being Wrong in 2010 which argues
“that error is the fundamental human condition and
should be celebrated as such” (Schulz, 2010). The current
book explains how errors can lead to more knowledge and
contextually-appropriate feelings and actions with which
to thrive in our uniquely experienced worlds.

The disconfirming moment:
On the cusp between past
and future
How do our brains learn to bene#t from a discon#rming
experience? Somehow, such an unexpected consequence
needs to be able to alter how we process past events. For
example, during the unblocking experiment summarized

16

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN
In particular, in response to an unexpected
consequence:
How does our brain search its memory to #nd
those particular features or events that should not
have been suppressed (like the flashing light), and
selectively shi! attention to focus upon them?
More generally, how do we ever progress from
the unknown to the known without any teacher
but for the fact of our predictive failure, which
tells us only that we have failed, but not how to
correct our failure?

FIGURE 1.10. The blocking paradigm shows how sensory cues
that are conditioned to predict specific consequences can attentionally block other cues that do not change these predictions.
On the other hand, if the total cue context is changed by adding
a cue that does change predicted consequences, then the new
cues can become conditioned to the direction of that change.
They can hereby learn, for example, to predict fear if the shock
level unexpectedly increases, or relief if the shock level unexpectedly decreases.

in Figure 1.10 (right column), a more intense shock US2
may occur only after the buzzer sound and the flashing
light shut off, yet we can still learn to become afraid of the
flashing light. Somehow the sound and the light get stored
in our short-term memory for awhile, even a!er the sensory cues themselves shut off. As a result, the stored representation of the flashing light can be associated with the
fear that the increased shock level later causes.
This conclusion draws attention to a paradox. If the
shock level had not changed, then the flashing light would
have been blocked by the buzzer sound, and thus not attended. How does the stored representation of the flashing
light survive the blocking effect of the bell in order to
become associated with the increased shock level, which
only occurs later on?
The moment when the increased shock level occurs has
important scienti#c and philosophical implications. At
such a disconfirming moment, we do not know what went
wrong, only that the prediction of the expected shock level
has been discon#rmed. At such a discon#rming moment,
we are, by de#nition, focusing our attention on the wrong
environmental cues (like the buzzer sound and its predicted shock level), which unexpectedly fail to predict
the expected consequence. When such a discon#rmation
occurs, we do not know which cues should have been attended (like the flashing light) instead of being blocked
along with other irrelevant environmental cues.
How does our brain discover the correct combination
of cues with which to correctly predict an unexpected
consequence?
How does our brain do this without a teacher to tell us
the correct answer?

Predictive mismatch,
nonspecific arousal, and
memory search
One thing is immediately clear: When an expectation is
mismatched by the environment, whatever mechanism
drives the search for the correct answer must be able to
influence all of the cues that have been stored in shortterm memory. This is true because, at the discon#rming
moment of mismatch, we do not know which of these cues
are the correct ones. The brain needs to be able to alter
the processing of an as-yet-unknown subset of them. A
mismatch event that influences all the stored cues is said
to have a nonspecific effect. This effect is called nonspecific arousal because the mismatch turns on, or arouses, a
memory search that will lead to ampli#cation of the correct cues to attend (Figure 1.11).
We have o!en experienced the fact that “novel events
are arousing” during our lives without thinking about how

FIGURE 1.11. A sufficiently big mismatch between a bottom-up
input pattern and a top- down expectation can activate the orienting system, which triggers a burst of nonspecific arousal that
can reset the recognition category that read out the expectation.
In this way, unexpected events can reset short-term memory and
initiate a search for a category that better represents the current
situation.

Overview

and why this happens. How an unexpected, or novel, event
can trigger a memory search for a better representation
of the current situation, notably a new recognition category, will be described in Chapter 5 when I explain how
Adaptive Resonance Theory works. First, let me mention
some other important implications of what happens when
an expectation is discon#rmed.

Unexpected non-occurrences,
emotional rebounds, and
relaxation responses
If a shock unexpectedly increases in an unblocking experiment, then we may learn to respond to the flashing light
with fear. But what happens if the shock unexpectedly
decreases? Then we may learn to respond to the flashing
light with a wave of relief, as in the unblocking experiment of Figure 1.10 (right column). The amount by which
the shock increases or decreases can be calibrated to be
equally novel in both cases. Thus the novelty, or unexpectedness, of the shock is not the same thing as the affective
response that will be learned in response to the light, since
the same amount of novelty can predict opposite affective
responses. This example emphasizes that cognition (in this
case, the learned expectation) and emotion (in this case,
the affective response) are distinct processes, albeit distinct processes that may strongly interact.
Relief can be generated even if the shock intensity suddenly decreases without totally shutting off. This situation
is harder to understand than the case where shock totally
shuts off because, a!er all, being shocked is a negative experience, no matter how intense the shock may be, and
feeling relief is a positive experience. How can our learned
expectations turn a negative experience into a (relatively)
positive experience? Where does the positivity come from?
Nor is a negative external event always needed for relief
to occur. For example, if you enter a situation where you
expect to get punished, then you can feel fear before anything negative happens. If you are not punished at around
the expected time, then a wave of relief can occur, despite
the fact that still nothing negative has happened! Thus a
wave of relief can occur either if there is a sudden decrease
in punishment, or a discon#rmed expectation that punishment will occur. Just believing that a punishing event
will occur can lead to either negative or positive feelings.
The cognitive context can hereby greatly alter the emotions that we will experience in different situations.
The feeling of relief has many implications for understanding, and trying to better organize, our daily lives.
For starters, relief is an important source of positive feelings, of “feeling good” about ourselves and our lives. It
is also one basis of the Relaxation Response, a term that

|

17

was popularized by the book of that title in 1975 that was
written by Herbert Benson and Miriam Klipper (Benson
and Klipper, 1975). This Response is at the root of methods
like yoga which are aimed at achieving relaxation through
Transcendental Meditation.
A wave of relief in response to an unexpected event illustrates that Transcendental Meditation is only one way
to generate a feeling of relaxation. Such a wave of relief is
an example of a positive emotional rebound; it is a transient positive affect that is triggered by the cessation or
reduction of a negative event, or by discon#rmation of a
negative expectation. A negative emotional rebound can
also occur. For example, if a positive reward is suddenly
withdrawn, such as an ice cream cone while you are in the
midst of eating it, or a sexual partner during sex, then you
can feel a wave of frustration. Likewise, if you are merely
expecting something good to eat, or a wonderful night of
sex with your lover or spouse, and dinner or your date is
unexpectedly cancelled, then that alone can cause a wave
of frustration.
Such rebounds are philosophically interesting, if only
because the nonoccurrence of an expected punishment
or reward—with nothing really happening—can cause intense internal feelings of the opposite emotional sign, such
as the relief or frustration in the above examples. That is
why these events are called antagonistic, or opponent, rebounds. This is one of many examples where the occurrence of “nothing” can trigger strong internal experiences.
Philosophers and gurus have long been aware that “nothingness” can itself be a potent experience. I will explain
the main properties of how these antagonistic emotional
rebounds occur later in this chapter, and more completely
using the CogEM model in Chapter 13.

Do we know what we like?
Peak shift and behavioral
contrast
Before trying to explain the neural mechanism of antagonistic rebounds, let us #rst acknowledge that, a!er enough
interactions between our beliefs and our feelings go on for
a lifetime, it may become difficult for us to predict in advance the experiences that we will like the most when we
#nally do experience them. For example, when both rewarding and punishing events occur in a given situation,
whether due to the direct action of rewards and punishments, or due to antagonistic rebounds, it is possible for
us to end up preferring an event that we never experienced
more than the events in our lives that have been directly
rewarded. This phenomenon is called peak shift and behavioral contrast. To the question: “Do we know what we will
like?”, the answer can thus all too o!en be “no”.

18

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

A simple example of peak shi! and behavioral contrast
occurs when pigeons are trained to respond to one colored light when it flashes on, and to not respond to other
colored lights when they flash on. These pigeons are not
trained by Pavlovian or classical conditioning. Rather, they
are trained by Skinnerian or operant conditioning. During
learning by operant conditioning, animals or humans are
rewarded or punished only after they emit a certain behavior, or set of behaviors. The probability or reward or
punishment can be varied in many ways. Although operant conditioning was #rst extensively studied by Edward
Thorndike (e.g., Thorndike, 1927), B. F. Skinner has o!en
been thought of as the father of operant conditioning since
his classical book called The Behavior of Organisms was
published in 1938 (Skinner, 1938). Skinner and his disciples systematically studied how changing the probabilities
of reward and/or punishment in a reinforcement schedule
could generate different patterns of behavior.
Suppose that a pigeon is trained via a reinforcement
schedule to respond to a given colored light cue. A!er
learning occurs, one can test if the pigeon also responds
to other colors, and can compare how much it responds
to the rewarded color vs. the non-rewarded colors. Such
tests generally elicit a generalization gradient whereby the
pigeon responds progressively less as a function of how different the wavelength of the test light is compared to that
of the training light (see Figure 1.12, le! column, top row).
Now alter the training of the pigeon in the following
way: A!er training with reward to respond to one colored
light, train it with punishment to not respond to a different
colored light, and do so using a method of shaping the pigeon’s behavior called errorless training that was published
by Herbert Terrace in 1963 (Terrace, 1963). When the pigeon’s responses are now tested to other colored lights, the
remarkable effect called peak shift and behavioral contrast
is observed.
Peak shift means that the pigeon now pecks most in
response to a color that it has never experienced (Figure
1.12, right column). When the number of pecks is plotted
against the wavelength of colors, this preferred color is
“repelled” from the wavelength on which the pigeon was
earlier punished.
Even more remarkable is the property of behavioral
contrast: the pigeon responds more to this novel color than
it ever did to the rewarded color (compare Figure 1.12, le!
column, top row, with Figure 1.12, right column). In other
words, not only did the pigeon prefer a non-rewarded
color, but it preferred it more than it ever preferred the
rewarded color!
These response properties show that the cells which
selectively respond to different wavelengths of light are
organized in orderly cortical maps. Cortical maps of various kinds occur ubiquitously in our brains (see Grossberg
(2020b) for a review of cortical map models). When one
considers that ordered maps of wavelength-selective cells

may be replaced by a great variety of ordered maps of
every conceivable kind of feature, it becomes clear that,
a!er a lifetime of rewards and punishments, we may surprise ourselves by intensely liking options that we never
before experienced. In this sense, we may not “know what
we like”.

The noise-saturation
dilemma and short-term
memory normalization
Why does the property of behavioral contrast occurs? This
may be understood by considering Figure 1.12 (le! row,
bottom column). This #gure shows the positive generalization gradient, in green, that ensues a!er rewarding a
particular color, or wavelength. It also shows the negative
generalization gradient, in red, that would ensue if only
one wavelength was punished, and the other wavelength
was not rewarded. What happens, then when one color is
rewarded and another is punished? It makes good intuitive sense to assume that the net generalization gradient
which would ensue in this case is the difference between
the positive and negative generalization gradients. This net
gradient is shown in purple in Figure 1.12 (le! row, bottom
column).
This net gradient does exhibit the peak shi! in preference. However, it does not exhibit behavioral contrast. The
failure of behavioral contrast is due to the fact that a net
gradient must always be lower than the positive gradient
from which it is constructed. However, this is not what
happens during behavioral contrast.

FIGURE 1.12. Peak shift and behavioral contrast. When a negative generalization gradient (in red) is subtracted from a positive
generalization gradient (in green), the net gradient (in purple) is
shifted away from the negative gradient and has a width that is
narrower than that of either of its triggering gradients. Because
the total activity of the network tends to be normalized, the
renormalized peak of the net gradient is higher than that of the
rewarded gradient, thereby illustrating that we can prefer experiences that we have never previously experienced over those for
which we have previously been rewarded.

Overview

What is missing?
A clue can be found by noting that the width of the
net generalization gradient is narrower than the widths of
either the positive or the negative generalization gradients.
How does the narrower width of the net gradient lead to
the greater height that is found during behavioral contrast
in Figure 1.12 (right column)?
This property follows directly from the fact that, in
many ordered feature maps, not only ones that organize
color-sensitive feature detectors, the cells that respond selectively to the features interact via a shunting on-center
off-surround network (Figure 1.6). As we noted above,
such networks are ubiquitous in cellular tissues, not only
brains, in order to solve the noise-saturation dilemma;
that is, to be able to process distributed patterns of inputs
to a network of feature-selective cells without causing the
cells to experience either noise or saturation (Figure 1.5).
I proved in the early 1970s that such networks tend to
normalize their total activity (Figure 1.7). In other words,
they tend to have a maximum activity that is independent
of the number of cells in the network. In recurrent shunting on-center off-surround networks—namely, the ones
that can store activities in short-term memory (Figure
1.6)—the network tends to maintain a normalized total activity through time as part of the memory storage process.
As more cells get activated, then other things being equal,
each cell has less activity in order to conserve total activity.
The property of total activity normalization shows
itself in many different ways in our lives. In the case of
peak shi! and behavioral contrast, it causes behavioral
contrast: Because the net generalization gradient is narrower, its peak activity is greater in order to (approximately) conserve the total activity under the net generalization gradient. We will see in Chapter 4 how total activity
normalization also leads to brightness constancy and contrast during visual perception, and in Chapter 12 to the
bowed serial position curve during free recall of items that
are stored in short-term memory in a cognitive working
memory, among many other properties that follow from
the brain’s solution of the noise-saturation dilemma.

|

19

experience the corresponding cues are discon#rmed when
they do not occur. Are these positive and negative rebounds
useful for survival? The answer is emphatically “yes”.
What is the adaptive value of a positive emotional rebound? As one example, if you enter a fearful situation and
are not punished during a sufficient number of these experiences, then the positive relief that you feel can help you to
learn not to be afraid of that situation any more, and thus
to feel comfortable working or playing in it, and not just to
persistently trying to avoid it.
How does the positive relief free you from your learned
fears? When the positive relief rebound is balanced against
the negative learned fear, we can then learn to cancel the
fear with the relief due to competition between them
(Figure 1.13, le! column). When there is no longer any
net fear reaction, we can approach the situation with new
hope. This kind of cancellation occurs in brain circuits
wherein positive and negative emotional centers interact
together. Such circuits are called opponent processes because the positive and negative events activate mutually
exclusive, or “opponent”, pathways that compete with one
another. I will explain below how opponent processes are
designed to enable antagonistic rebounds to occur.
What is the adaptive value of a negative emotional rebound? As one example, suppose that you are seeking an
expected positive reward like food in your refrigerator at
home or, if you would prefer a more exotic example, at an
oasis in the desert. Suppose that the expected food is not
there: In the #rst case, the refrigerator may be empty, and
in the second case, all the coconuts at the oasis may have
already been eaten. Frustration may occur in either case
when the expectation of food is discon#rmed.
Why is the feeling of frustration when the expected food
is gone important to survival? As noted above, part of the
story is that frustration can balance and cancel the learned
positive motivation to return again and again to the refrigerator, or to the oasis, for food whenever we were hungry
(Figure 1.13, middle column). Such perseverative, even obsessive, behavior could lead to death, since we would eventually starve if, whenever we were hungry, we kept going to

Opponent processing,
forgetting, obsession, and
exploration
As noted above, a positive antagonistic rebound, such
as relief, can occur when a negative reinforcer, such as
a shock, suddenly turns off (Figure 1.13, le! column).
A negative antagonistic rebound, such as frustration,
can occur when a positive reinforcer, such as food or
sex, suddenly shuts off (Figure 1.13, middle column).
These rebounds can also occur when expectations to

FIGURE 1.13. Affective circuits are organized into opponent channels,
such as fear vs. relief, and hunger vs. frustration. On a larger scale of
affective behaviors, exploration and consummation are also opponent types of behavior. Exploration helps to discover novel sources of
reward. Consummation enables expected rewards to be acted upon.
Exploration must be inhibited to enable an animal to maintain attention
long enough upon a stationary reward in order to consume it.

20

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

a place where there was no longer any food. This does not
happen to us, in part, because the positive motivation to
get our food there is cancelled by negative frustration. The
second part of an adaptive response to a discon#rmed expectation is that, when the motivation to seek food in an
unproductive place is cancelled, it can no longer inhibit the
innate tendency to explore the environment in search of
novel sources of reward (Figure 1.13, right column).
The above examples illustrate how a disconnect between the motivation to do something and its affective
consequences can enable a wide range of maladaptive behaviors to persist for a long time. Fortunately, when “nothingness” triggers an emotional rebound, it can protect us
from obsessively, and self-destructively, seeking rewards
where they can no longer be found.
The failure to #nd food on just one occasion in the refrigerator or oasis does not imply that we will never again seek
food in those places. On the other hand, if such a predictive
failure happens sufficiently o!en, then the multiple experiences of negative frustration which it causes can cumulatively cancel the positive approach to the refrigerator or oasis
through opponent learning. We then say that the motivation
to seek food in that situation is extinguished. “Extinction” is
the psychological word for emotional “forgetting”.
The same sort of conclusion can be drawn from situations where you expect to be punished, but unexpectedly
are not punished. Then your learned fear of such a situation can be inhibited by positive relief rebounds. If this
happens on enough occasions, the fear can extinguish
through opponent learning of the relief rebound. The extinguished fear then no longer inhibits exploratory behavior, so that one can begin anew to explore that situation,
or even totally different environments, for sources of positive reward. Cognitively-mediated positive and negative
rebounds can hereby help us to flexibly adjust to changing, or poorly understood, environmental contingencies,
and thereby permit us to explore the world more fully to
#nd new sources of satisfaction. They are a prime example
of how cognition and emotion can work together to learn
valuable adaptive skills. Substituting positive for negative affects, by one or another means, is now a standard
strategy in what has come to be called Positive Psychiatry
(Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi, 2000).

Partial reward: Irrationality,
gambling, creativity, and
unrequited love
Were life only so simple! These very same mechanisms,
which are so important to our survival, can also lead us
into maladaptive, irrational, and even bizarre behaviors
when they interact with the wrong environments. How

this can happen provides a mechanistic rationale for the
commonsense view that you can get into a lot of trouble if
you allow yourself to get involved with the wrong people
or the wrong situations. This kind of folk wisdom, which
is traditionally passed along by parents to their children,
o!en contains a kernel of truth. Our potential weakness in
these “bad” situations is a consequence of the very mechanisms that help our species to survive in other, even more
life-threatening, situations, and is thus one of the burdens
that we have to learn how to cope with as well as we can.
As we will see in a moment, our learned expectations can
again greatly influence how we behave in these risky situations, so learning the right expectations—or more generally, experiencing the right influences on our thinking—
can make a huge difference in how well we cope with them.
A striking classical example of what can go wrong is
called the partial reinforcement acquisition effect, or the
partial reward effect, for short. The source of the problem
is that a given behavior does not always get rewarded a
consistent manner. The world is simply too complicated
for that to happen all of the time. To see what I mean, #rst
consider a simple example of consistent reward. Suppose
that a rat is rewarded with food pellets every time it runs
down an alley to the other end, where food is made available. This is called a continuous reward schedule. If a
rat is continuously rewarded enough times, then it will
learn to run quickly down the alley for food whenever it
is hungry. As we briefly noted above, this sort of learning
is o!en called Skinnerian conditioning a!er the famous
twentieth century American psychologist, B. F. Skinner,
who intensively studied it with his colleagues. Skinnerian
conditioning is also called operant conditioning because
it describes the learned effects of reward or punishment
that are given contingent upon the responses, or operants,
that an animal or person spontaneously emits. In classical
conditioning, responses are, in contrast, elicited by an external stimulus, like a shock or food. Despite this difference, the two types of learning share many properties.
Partial reward is said to occur if the rat is rewarded
on only a fraction of the occasions when it runs down the
alley. It receives no reward on the other occasions. What
happens if the total amount of reward is the same under
continuous and partial reward schedules? The remarkable
fact is that partially rewarded animals learn to run down
the alley faster than continuously rewarded animals, even
though they have to work much harder for the same total
amount of reward. Moreover, if one gradually decreases
the fraction of times that a rat is rewarded for running
down the alley, then it will persist in running down the
alley to get rewarded on very few trials. Running like a
maniac for a very small number of rewards is, on the face
of it, not a particularly rational behavior, but once the rat
is hooked, it may keep running for a very long time. Does
this sound familiar in many lives that we know? The trick
is #rst to get an animal or human “hooked” initially with a

Overview

sufficient number of rewards, and then to gradually reduce
the probability of reward.
Partial reward is not always bad. Because the world is
complicated, we cannot always expect to get continuously
rewarded, even in situations where reward may very well
be forthcoming in the future. One needs to look no further than one’s own busy parents for many examples of
this basic truth. Partial rewards thus help to keep us trying
to get rewards in situations where they are likely to be
forthcoming, albeit not on every try. On the other hand,
partial reward can also have seriously maladaptive effects
on behavior. For example, suppose that a person happens,
by chance, to win some money at gambling. Once a person
is “hooked”, he or she might continue to gamble for a long
time, even though a win is very unlikely, and end up losing
a lot of money. Or imagine a love affair that begins really
wonderfully, with both partners feeling highly rewarded
by each other most of the time. Suppose that one partner
gets disenchanted, and starts giving the other partner
fewer and fewer rewards. The unrequited lover might hang
on for a very long time, thrilled by even an occasional
phone call that, before the affair got started, may not have
had such an intensely rewarding effect.
How do such profound effects on behavior occur? To
get started, consider what goes on as a rat runs down an
alley on a partial reward schedule. Because it is just partial reward, the rat can build up an expectation that it will
not get rewarded a!er a given run down the alley. Suppose,
however, that the rat does get rewarded a!er that particular run down the alley. The reward will hereby discon#rm
the negative expectation of non-reward, and can thereby
cause a positive emotional rebound. This positive rebound
can add to the direct positive effect of the reward to make
that experience feel extremely rewarding—much more rewarding, in fact, than the direct effect of the reward all by
itself. The same thing can happen during unrequited love.
A similar thing can happen in many other situations.
For example, it may be more thrilling to see a magni#cent
view at the top of a mountain a!er climbing it yourself and
overcoming lots of dangerous experiences, than it is to just
see a video of the view from the top. Partial reward may
also help to maintain creative behaviors when they are infrequently rewarded, even over a period of many years. It
can thus have both major positive and negative effects on
the development of personality, culture, and societies.

Learned helplessness in the
lab and society
The mechanisms that operate during partial reward may
maintain behavior for a long time. These same mechanisms may also suppress behavior. For example, imagine

|

21

a situation in which a person or animal tries to escape
from one bad situation, only to end up in another one.
They then try to escape that situation, and end up where
they started. A!er awhile, the person or animal may just
“give up” and develop a learned helplessness in which they
no longer explore their environment at all, but instead are
afflicted with persistent negative feelings. The American
psychologist Martin Seligman began to publish studies
about learned helplessness in 1967 (Maier and Seligman,
1976; Seligman and Maier, 1967) as a way to better understand depression. The environmental contingencies that
lead to learned helplessness are particularly pernicious.
Normally, escaping from a negative situation would create
a positive relief rebound. But if the escape leads you “from
the frying pan into the #re”, then the direct negativity of
the new situation can cancel the positive rebound from
your attempted escape. If you continue to experience such
“double-whammies”, eventually all net motivation can be
cancelled, and a feeling of helplessness can develop.
Learned helplessness has been experimentally studied
using rats, dogs, and other animals in a two-way shuttlebox. Suppose that the animal starts out by sitting in one
half of the box. Then the floor is electri#ed. The animal experiences pain and fear from the electric shock, and runs
to the other half of the box to escape. This escape behavior
would normally elicit a positive relief rebound that, other
things being equal, would be associated through learning
with sensory cues from the second half of the box. The
animal could then later respond to these cues by running
to the second half of the box to escape the shock in the #rst
half of the box. Relief can hereby motivate the learning of
escape behaviors in many environments.
Unfortunately, in the particular situation of the shuttlebox, other things are not equal, because the experimentalist—
or if you view this as a metaphor, the world—does something cruel. Shortly a!er the animal runs to the second
half of the box, the floor in that half of the box is also electri#ed. Now the animal runs to the #rst half of the box to
escape. Again a relief rebound would normally motivate the
animal to escape the second half of the box to get back to
the #rst half. But the animal has already learned to associate the cues in the #rst half of the box with the directly
felt pain and fear that it originally experienced, feelings
that are strengthened when the experimentalist electri#es
the floor of the #rst half of the box once again. When the
animal again experiences shock in the #rst half of the box,
the learned fear response is strengthened and can eventually overwhelm the positive rebound. As a result, the positive relief rebound due to escape from the second half of the
box is cancelled by the fear that the animal associates with
the #rst half. The same thing happens in the second half of
the box. In time, all positive motivation is cancelled and the
animal has no expectation of positive reward. The animal
simply sits, shivers, and defecates, totally defeated by his
environment.

22

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Humans can also experience learned helplessness,
notably in underprivileged ghettos where all opportunities for positive reward may be cancelled by negative
contingencies. To help people out of these situations, it is
important to create new opportunities whereby positive
behaviors and expectations may be learned that will not
be inexorably defeated.

Secondary conditioning and
advertising
Conditioning o!en builds upon affective reactions to primary reinforcers, such as shock or the taste of food, which
are built into our brain circuits from birth. A!er conditioning occurs, previously meaningless events, like buzzer
sounds and flashing lights, can elicit many of the internal
emotional reactions of the primary reinforcers with which
they are associated. When this happens, these events are
said to become conditioned reinforcers. Talking about conditioned reinforcers is just another way of saying that classical and operant conditioning are possible.
Conditioned reinforcers do not exist just to amuse
psychological experimentalists! They are crucial for survival. For example, the sight of food may not initially
elicit any desire to eat in a baby, even if the taste or the
smell of the food does. At birth, the baby may not know
what food looks like, and different kinds of food have different appearances in different societies. By pairing the
sight of food reliably with the taste of food, the sight of
food can then elicit appetitive reactions, like approaching
the food, salivation, reaching the food, and other preparations to eat. In the negative direction, if you are exposed
to a unique situation in which something terrible occurs
to you, then that situation, all by itself, can elicit extreme
conditioned fear and other emotional reactions, such as
learned helplessness, at least until you get a chance to extinguish these fearful reactions if the terrible event stops
occurring in that situation. All the examples of learning
from antagonistic rebounds are also examples of conditioned reinforcers at work.
More interesting possibilities can occur when conditioned reinforcers are used to condition yet other events
that are initially affectively neutral. This process is called
secondary conditioning. Using secondary conditioning, a
whole chain of reinforcers can be established through iterated learning experiences. The sensory cues that de#ne
the conditioned reinforcers in the chain may be totally different from those of the original primary reinforcer, yet
may still generate strong affective reactions. We experience
the effects of such secondary reinforcement chains every
day, since they are one foundation for the multi-billion
dollar #eld of advertising: Many people associate the

visual appearance of a sexually appealing person with primary sexual reinforcement during their lives. Seeing such
people, or pictures of them, can generate sexual arousal.
Advertising exploits such associations. An ad in which a
car, bottle of cologne, or even a bottle of soda, appears with
a picture of a sexually enticing person can be used to sell
millions of dollars of cars, cologne, or soda based on secondary sexual arousal.

Gated dipole opponent
processing: Arousal,
habituation, and
competition
What is sexual arousal, or any other sort of emotional
arousal for that matter? We can begin to understand the
need for some sort of emotional arousal by thinking more
about emotional rebounds. Rebounds are events that can
be triggered in our brains when an external event, like a
shock or food source, is removed. The offset of such an external event triggers the rebound inside our brains. But
there is, by de#nition, no external event to trigger the rebound, because the relevant external event has just shut
off. There must therefore be an internal source of energy,
or activation, that triggers the rebound a!er the external
event shuts off. This internal source of activity is one type
of arousal. Since we never know when an external event
will shut off and trigger a rebound, this internal arousal
source must be on all the time; that is, it is tonically active.
But if it is on all the time, then why does it not cause rebounds to occur all the time?
Persistent rebounds are avoided because the arousal
activates both of the channels in an opponent processing
circuit, such as the one which controls fear and relief, as in
Figure 1.14. These channels compete with each other before
generating a net output, as was partially diagrammed in
Figure 1.13. Only if there is more fear than relief, or conversely, do we experience a net emotion. In response to
arousal alone, no net output may be generated a!er competition between the opponent channels takes place.
We are now ready to better understand how emotional
rebounds are triggered in the brain. Only a few basic
mechanisms, interacting together in the correct order
within an opponent processing circuit, are needed to
trigger rebounds and to learn from both primary and secondary reinforcers. This circuit is called a gated dipole for
reasons that will soon become clear (Figure 1.14). I introduced the gated dipole design in 1972 when I was studying
how punishment and avoidance work (Grossberg, 1972a,
1972b), but it gradually became clear that variations and

Overview

FIGURE 1.14. A gated dipole opponent process can generate a
transient antagonistic rebound from its OFF channel in response
to offset of an input (J) to its ON channel.

specializations of this circuit design occur all over the
brain, in multiple modalities.
When an external event like a shock activates the fear
channel (the ON channel in Figure 1.14), then the fear
channel gets both a shock-induced input and an arousal
input. The shock input is phasic; it turns on and off through
time (see variable J in Figure 1.14). The arousal input is
tonic; it is on all the time (see variable I in Figure 1.14). For
simplicity, arousal is assumed to be constant through time,
but in general it can change more slowly than the phasic
inputs that it modulates. In contrast, the relief, or OFF,
channel receives only the same tonic arousal input as does
the ON channel. As a result, when the signals in the ON
and OFF channels compete, the ON, or fear, channel wins
the competition between the opponent channels, giving
rise to a net output of fear. See the yellow output response
labeled ON from the ON channel.
When the shock shuts off, both channels receive an
equal tonic arousal input I. If both channels now get equal
inputs, then why does a relief rebound occur a!er the
shock shuts off?
Here is the main idea: As just described, when the
shock input is on, the fear channel gets a larger total input
than the relief channel. As a result, the fear channel gets
desensitized, fatigued, or habituated more than the relief
channel does when the shock input is on (see the square
synapses labeled y1 and y2 in the ON and OFF channels
of Figure 1.14). This form of activity-dependent desensitization is called transmitter habituation, or synaptic

|

23

depression. A!er the shock input shuts off, it takes awhile
for the habituated fear channel to recover from the shock.
Before it recovers, equal arousal inputs occur in the fear
ON channel and the relief OFF channel. However, the fear
channel is less sensitive to its arousal input than is the
relief channel, due to its lingering greater degree of habituation. The arousal input to the relief channel can now generate a larger response than it can in the desensitized fear
channel. A!er the channels compete, a net relief response
is generated. This response is the emotional rebound to
shock offset in the relief channel. It is the yellow response
labeled OFF from the OFF channel.
Why does not the feeling of relief persist forever? Why
is the relief rebound transient in time? The rebound lasts
until habituation in the fear channel recovers from the
previous shock input. When that happens, both channels exhibit the same degree of habituation in response
to their equal arousal inputs. As a result, both channels
can again respond equally to their arousal inputs and can
equally inhibit one another, thereby terminating the relief
rebound.
I have called a habituative opponent processing circuit,
such as the one summarized in Figure 1.14, a gated dipole
to emphasize that the habituative transmitters multiply,
or gate, signals in a pair, or dipole, of opponent channels.
Chapter 13 uses simple algebra to prove these properties of
gated dipole ON and OFF responses. This analysis shows
how interactions between the following simple processes,
occurring in the correct order, generate these properties,
as well as many others: phasic and tonic inputs, habituative transmitters that try to provide unbiased responses
to their inputs while habituating to them, opponent competition, and output thresholding. Gated dipoles hereby
provide compelling examples of how simple mechanisms,
interacting together, can generate surprising emergent
properties with profound implications for how our brains
work in health and disease.

Short-term memory,
medium-term memory,
and long-term memory
The habituative process that helps to create an antagonistic
rebound in a gated dipole is what I called medium-term
memory, or MTM, in the book’s Preface. MTM variables
(variables y1 and y2 in Figure 1.14) change more slowly than
the short-term memory (STM) traces, or activities, of the
gated dipoles (variables x1 through x6 in Figure 1.14). The
long-term memory (LTM) traces whereby cues become
conditioned reinforcers through learning change on an
even slower time scale than the MTM traces.

24

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

also briefly describe the historical context in which these
discoveries were made, including various of the leading
scientists who contributed to it. Readers who want to hear
me describe these laws, and how I discovered them when I
was a Freshman at Dartmouth College in 1957-1958, might
want to listen to the lecture that I gave when I received the
2015 Norman Anderson Lifetime Achievement Award by
the Society of Experimental Psychologists (see YouTube,
https://youtu.be/9n5AnvFur7I).

Drives, satiety, and starving
for love

FIGURE 1.15. A recurrent associative dipole, or READ, circuit is a
recurrent shunting on- center off-surround network with habituative transmitter gates. Sensory cues sample it with LTM traces and
thereby become conditioned reinforcers.

When LTM traces are included in a gated dipole circuit
(see Figure 1.15), it can learn positive and negative conditioned reinforcers in response to both phasic cue changes
and to discon#rmed expectations. This circuit has recurrent, or feedback, pathways between the ON and OFF dipole
channels; notably, the ON channel recurrent pathway from
activity x7 to x1, and the OFF channel recurrent pathway
from activity x8 to x2. These recurrent pathways convert the
gated dipole into a recurrent on-center off-surround network that can maintain a motivational baseline in STM
against momentary distractions, while also normalizing
dipole activity across its opponent channels. This recurrent
circuit also includes LTM traces (variables zk7 and zk8) that
can convert sensory CS cues (variables Sk) into secondary
positive or negative reinforcers either directly in response
to primary reinforcers, or due to antagonistic rebounds
across the ON and OFF channels. Because of these new features, the entire circuit was called a REcurrent Associative
Dipole, or READ, circuit when my postdoctoral fellow
Nestor Schmajuk and I introduced it in 1987 (Grossberg
and Schmajuk, 1987). The acronym READ summarizes the
ability of the LTM traces to read-in and read-out the results
of conditioned reinforcer learning.
The READ circuit illustrates that even simple circuits
like opponent processing circuits that are capable of regulating classical and operant conditioning require interactions between STM, MTM, and LTM variables that change
on three different time scales. What are the equations that
STM, MTM, and LTM obey in the brain? I summarize the
simplest versions of these equations and some of their most
important functional properties in Chapter 2, where I will

Gated dipole arousal is not the only internal input that energizes emotional behavior. For example, suppose that you
got conditioned to the sight of food. Why do we not eat
compulsively all day whenever we see any food? In particular, why do we not uncontrollably gorge ourselves every
time that we pass a supermarket? Likewise, why do we not
try to copulate with every attractive passerby on the street?
Additional neural mechanisms are needed to control such
inappropriate urges. When these mechanisms fail to work
correctly, then uncontrollable eating and sexual exhibitionism can be elicited, and are known to occur in certain
mental patients.
We all know that emotional behaviors do not occur
with equal strength throughout the day. They can wax
and wane in response to how changing external cues
(like being in a restaurant, or in bed with your lover) interact with changing internal homeostatic cues (like being
hungry, or feeling sexually aroused). Internal homeostatic
inputs are o!en called drive inputs; see Figure 1.16 (le!
column). Distinct internal drive inputs energize eating,
drinking, and sexual behaviors, among others. These
drive inputs are delivered to emotional centers, such as
the amygdala, and alter their sensitivity to the external
cues that are represented in the sensory cortices, and
which also send signals to the amygdala. Different parts
of the amygdala, among other midbrain regions, such as
the hypothalamus, are sensitive to different drive inputs
and different sensory inputs (Figure 1.16, right column)
with which to sensitize or desensitize them. For example,
if you are hungry, hunger-inducing drive inputs become
large, and sensitize eating circuits in the amygdala and hypothalamus to respond to sensory inputs from food and
eating-related contexts. Eating can thereby be elicited.
A!er eating a big meal, you can become satiated, and your
hunger drive input can become small. These hunger and
satiety signals oppose one another, just as fear and relief
oppose one another in a gated dipole circuit (Figures 1.14
and 1.15). When the satiety signal gets large, you will ordinarily be less tempted to eat a lot even if food is presented.

Overview

|

25

could influence the competitive decision. Without any hunger drive
input, however, sensory cues of food
could not activate the incentive motivation that would be needed to
elicit eating behavior (Figure 1.17,
bottom row). Moving the competition one step later in the circuit
design is sufficient to spare us from
this grim fate. In a sensory-drive
heterarchy circuit (Figure 1.17, top
row), a lower but positive hunger
FIGURE 1.16. (left panel) The main processing stages of the Cognitive-Emotional-Motor
drive input, supplemented by food
(CogEM) model have anatomical interpretations in terms of sensory cortex, amygdala, and presensory cues, could generate a larger
frontal cortex. Chapter 13 will describe in greater detail how CS cues activate invariant object
categories in the sensory cortex, value categories in the amygdala, and object-value categototal input to the competitive stage,
ries in the prefrontal cortex, notably the orbitofrontal cortex. The amygdala is also modulated
thereby enabling incentive motivaby internal drive inputs like hunger and satiety. (right panel) Anatomical data support this
tion for eating to win.
circuit, as do many neurophysiological data.
This example illustrates that a
specific order of interacting proThis conclusion needs to be quali#ed with a lot of cacesses is o!en needed to assure
veats, however. For example, the satiety drive input is dethat our brain circuits work as well as they do. Brain cirrived from several factors, ranging from fast-acting signals
cuits are emphatically not connected together in a random
that indicate how full the stomach currently is, so you do
way! The sensory-drive heterarchy circuit also clari#es
not eat until your stomach bursts, to more slowly-acting
how we can “make room” for eating a dessert a!er we have
signals that reflect the digested metabolic contents of what
already eaten a big main course. Even if the hunger drive
has been eaten. The fast-acting satiety signal helps to exinput is then small, a large conditioned reinforcer sensory
plain why, if you are dieting and do not want to eat too
input from a delicious-looking dessert can again generate
much, drinking a big glass of water before eating food
a large enough total sensory-plus-drive input to the comhelps to eat less. We can nonetheless o!en “make room”
petition stage to activate incentive motivation for eating.
for a delicious dessert even a!er eating a big meal. To unIn order to better understand how this works, we also
derstand how this happens, I will discuss more carefully
need to ask: Why have not the conditioned reinforcer
below how drives interact with rewarding cues. In particpathways for eating already habituated due to eating the
ular, we need to ask how a particular motivated behavior
main course of the meal? Here we need to acknowledge
gets chosen when several different drives, such as hunger
the genius of concocting a tempting dessert. A tempting
and sex, are simultaneously deprived.
What if you regularly eat a healthy diet, but have no
lover or other sexual outlet at the moment? If your sex drive
climbs higher than your hunger drive, why does this not
prevent you from eating until you can have sex? Why do you
not routinely “starve for love”?! One reason is that both internal drive inputs and external rewarding cues are needed
to trigger motivated behaviors like eating. Even if sexual
arousal is higher, it is not as effective in the absence of external sexual cues. It is the combination of external sensory
cues and internal drive cues that control the competition
to select a winning behavior, not the drives alone. I have
called this sort of circuit a sensory-drive heterarchy (Figure
1.17, top row). Such a heterarchy behaves very differently
than a drive hierarchy (Figure 1.17, bottom row) in which
drives compete to determine a winner before the winning
drive interacts with compatible external sensory cues.
If our brain circuits were designed to realize a drive hierarchy, then we could easily starve for love. In such a circuit,
if your sex drive input was higher than your hunger drive
FIGURE 1.17. Sensory- drive heterarchy vs. drive hierarchy. How
cues and drives interact to choose the drive and motivation that
input, the sex drive input could totally inhibit the hunger
will control behavioral choices.
drive input at the competition stage, before sensory cues

26

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

dessert o!en activates conditioned reinforcer pathways
that have not yet habituated, say because it will activate
a different combination of taste receptors than the main
course. Of course, even a delicious-looking dessert can be
declined if you feel “totally stuffed” when your drive input
is strongly inhibited by fast-acting satiety signals.
The sensory-drive heterarchy protects us from eating
so much that our stomachs burst by removing the drive to
eat as we become satiated. On the other hand, it does not
yet explain why we do not always immediately start eating
if we are hungry in a supermarket. This kind of contextsensitive socialized behavior depends upon higher cognitive factors that include plans for preparing and eating
dinner at home, and social learning about the contexts in
which various kinds of behaviors are appropriate. Such
higher factors, which are o!en controlled by circuits in
the prefrontal cortex (Figure 1.16), can “put the brakes on”
the purely sensory-drive constraints on behavior. Chapter
14 will explain how the prefrontal cortex learns cognitive
plans that are sensitive to environmental context, and how
these cognitive plans interact with affective processes that
regulate emotion and motivation and to thereby determine whether and when it is appropriate to eat, or indeed
to carry out just about any other reactive or learned behavior. For now, we need to focus on other problems that
need to be addressed for even the sensory-drive heterarchy
to work properly.

Golden Mean, Inverted U,
and two types of emotional
depression
We saw above that arousal needs to be tonically active in
a gated dipole opponent processing circuit (Figure 1.14) so
that rebounds can be triggered whenever they are needed.
But how is the level of arousal chosen? What if it is chosen
too small or too large? This is again a question of balance. If
there is too little arousal, then there is not enough activation
for the system to respond normally to external reinforcing
cues. The system becomes depressed due to underarousal,
and external inputs need to be bigger to compensate for the
reduced arousal. In other words, the response threshold is
elevated. This is not, in itself, surprising. However, a surprising property follows from the habituation process that
causes rebounds to occur in the #rst place: If there is too
little arousal, then when the size of external inputs exceeds
the elevated response threshold, the system reacts in a
hypersensitive way to further increases in external input.
Then abnormally large outputs can occur.
What happens if the arousal level is chosen too large?
Not surprisingly, the response threshold is then reduced. However, if there is too much arousal, then it can

overwhelm external cues. The system then becomes hyposensitive to external cues: No matter how large external
inputs get, they cannot generate big emotional outputs.
These abnormal hypersensitive and hyposensitive outputs are due to the habituative processes in a gated dipole,
which have the effect of dividing the net dipole responses.
Underarousal causes a small habituated level to occur.
Dividing by a smaller number gives rise to a bigger, or hypersensitive, suprathreshold response. Overarousal causes
a large habituated level to occur. Dividing by a larger
number gives rise to a smaller, or hyposensitive, suprathreshold response.
Only if there is an intermediate amount of arousal,
one that is sufficient to energize the system without overwhelming its external inputs, does the network respond
optimally. This intermediate level of arousal realizes a kind
of Golden Mean that balances between the two extremes or
underarousal and overarousal. As Figure 1.18 illustrates,
this Golden Mean de#nes an Inverted-U of responsiveness as a function of arousal, whereby behavior becomes
depressed in both the underaroused and overaroused extremes, albeit in different ways.
This Golden Mean provides some scienti#c insight into
why it is best to do everything in moderation . . . at least
most of the time! We also need to keep in mind that the
type of balance that helps to moderate our emotions is different from the one that helps us to learn quickly but stably
in the manner explained by Adaptive Resonance Theory.
Sorting out these different kinds of balanced processes is
one of the tasks of this book.
How our brains #nd and maintain a Golden Mean, and
do so every day of our lives, is one of the brain’s most impressive accomplishments. Finding and maintaining this
balance is a type of homeostatic plasticity, whereby the
brain adaptively calibrates its most effective operating parameters as conditions change (Chandler and Grossberg,
2012; Turrigiano, 1999). If homeostatic plasticity could

FIGURE 1.18. Inverted U as a function of arousal. A Golden
Mean at intermediate levels of arousal generates a combination
of behavioral threshold, sensitivity, and activation that can support typical behaviors. Both underarousal and overarousal lead
to symptoms that are found in mental disorders.

Overview

be incorporated into future computer so!ware and hardware that is designed to emulate biological intelligence,
then these computers could continually retune themselves
to cope both with short-term variations in daily processing demands, as well as to longer-term variations due to
changes in operating parameters as the equipment ages
or experiences modest breakdowns due to accidents and
other traumas.

Affective neuroscience,
mental disorders, and
uppers that bring you down
Due to the difficulty of understanding how cognitive
and emotional processes work together, practitioners of
Arti#cial Intelligence, or AI, avoided dealing with emotional processes altogether for many years. They focused
almost entirely on trying to understand thinking and related cognitive processes. Influential American psychologists like B. F. Skinner, who died in 1990, vigorously urged
scientists not to waste their time trying to theorize about
mental processes at all, and insisted that his colleagues
spend all their time collecting experimental data. Noam
Chomsky challenged Skinner’s viewpoint in 1959, in response to Skinner’s book Verbal Behavior, which attempted
to provide an analysis of language from the perspective of
operant conditioning. Chomsky’s critique helped to trigger
the Cognitive Revolution, which attracted increasing numbers of psychologists who began in earnest to study cognitive processes. This led to the formation of the Cognitive
Science Society in 1979. Now cognitive science is a #eld in
which cognitive modeling is actively practiced, although
o!en without a serious link to underlying brain processes.
More recently, an increasing number of scientists
began to study how emotional processes work. This #eld
is now o!en called Affective Computing, or Affective
Neuroscience, depending on whether the emphasis is
on technology or on how the brain works. In Affective
Neuroscience, experimental neuroscientists, such as the
contemporary American neuroscientists, Joseph LeDoux
(LeDoux, 1996) and Antonio Damasio (Damasio, 1999),
have written interesting books about their laboratory experiments and clinical experiences with emotional processes. The contemporary American engineer, Rosalind
Picard (Picard, 1997), has written about progress towards
designing wearable sensors and other devices that are sensitive to people’s emotional responses. Even more recently,
big companies like Google have invested in this kind of
technology. Few of these people, however, have modeled
how cognition and emotion interact in the brain or, more
generally, how to theoretically link brain mechanisms to
psychological functions.

|

27

My own work began to model how cognition and emotion interact when I realized in the late 1960s that cognition and emotion obey similar laws, albeit in response
to different combinations of inputs. This similarity helps
the two types of processes to interact seamlessly with
one another, thereby enabling our emotions to direct our
thoughts and actions towards achieving motivationally
valued cognitive goals. I will continue to discuss below
how cognitive and emotional processes work together to
enable us to quickly learn how to realize valued goals and
to escape dangerous situations, and to explain how this
may happen in our brains.
I will also illustrate how, when the balance that maintains the Golden Mean gets upset in the brain, then symptoms of mental disorders can arise. In particular, properties of underaroused and overaroused depression, at least
in the speci#c sense that is realized within a gated dipole
(Figure 1.18), can clarify symptoms of attention de#cit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), schizophrenia, and autism.
This analysis clari#es, for example, why a pharmacological “upper” like amphetamine, which is a speed-like drug,
may help children with ADHD by bringing them “down”.
I propose that many of these children are underaroused
and thus hypersensitive when their elevated response
thresholds are exceeded. The upper drug increases their
arousal, bringing them closer to the Golden Mean of their
Inverted-U, and thereby desensitizes them.
Such properties clarify why it is so hard to understand
various mental disorders. They seem o!en to be due to
problems of imbalance, and their symptoms are emergent, or interactive, properties of networks of interacting
nerve cells with imbalanced components of various kinds.
Before one can understand these imbalances, one #rst
needs to understand how the brain achieves the various
types of balance that characterize normal behaviors. I will

FIGURE 1.19. The ventral What stream is devoted to perception and categorization. The dorsal Where stream is devoted to
spatial representation and action. The Where stream is also often
called the Where/How stream because of its role in the control of
action.

28

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

explain how these properties of gated dipoles arise and
lead to symptoms of various mental disorders in Chapter
13, including that various individuals with autism may
have underaroused emotional dipoles, whereas individuals with schizophrenia may have overaroused ones.

Two types of learning:
Perceiving and knowing vs.
moving and navigating
The cognitive and emotional processes of thinking and
feeling are necessary for our survival, but they become
fully effective only if they can lead to appropriate actions
in space. Moving an arm under visual guidance to grasp
an object, or to defend against an attack, or to carry out
a dance gesture, involves #guring out where in space we
want our arm to move and how fast we want it to get there.
Years of learning are needed in order to flexibly plan and
fluently execute such movements. Because our bodies grow
so much from the time we are infants until we become
adults, the spatial relationships between our eyes and our
arms keep changing for many years. Our brains therefore need to keep recalibrating the maps that determine
where to move an arm to an object in space that we want
to grasp. In addition to recalibrating where to move, additional circuits recalibrate how to get there by compensating for the changing weight of our arms and the amount of
force that they can generate during the execution of motor
commands. Very different forces are, for example, needed
to successfully move a feather or a boulder to the same position in space. Even working out at the gym can change
these “how to do it” parameters by altering the amount of
force that our limbs can generate.
Given that our motor systems use learning to work
well throughout life, we need to ask: Is the type of learning
that goes on during perception and cognition, whereby we
learn to understand the world, the same as the spatial and
motor learning, whereby we can plan and execute a movement? The answer is No, and for a very basic reason.
Perceptual and cognitive learning need to solve the
stability-plasticity dilemma, so that we can continue to
learn more and more about the world throughout life,
and become expert about increasing numbers of topics,
without experiencing catastrophic forgetting. In contrast,
we do not want to remember into adulthood the spatial
relationships and motor commands that we learned in
order to move our infant arms and bodies. These infant
commands are totally inappropriate for moving our much
larger and stronger adult limbs. Catastrophic forgetting is
a good property during spatial and motor learning, since
it is adaptive to forget old spatial relationships and motor

commands, and to remember only the new learning that
is suited to moving our limbs in our bodies as they exist
today. When these two types of learning work together in
the brain, perceptual and cognitive representations can
learn more and more about the world in a stable way, even
as they control the read-out of learned spatial relationships and motor commands that are continually updated
in response to our changing bodies. I sometimes like to
think of the difference between a plan to move and how to
get there as a modern version of the difference between a
Platonic Ideal and the Newtonian forces that are needed to
realize the idealized plan.

What and Where cortical
processing streams and
consciousness
These two types of learning, perceptual/cognitive vs. spatial/motor, typically go on in different brain systems. In
the early 1980s, Mortimer Mishkin, Leslie Ungerleider,
and their colleagues (e.g., Mishkin, Ungerleider, and
Macko, 1983) noted that there are two distinct processing
streams, or pathways, in the cerebral cortex of the mammalian brain. The ventral stream processes information
that enables us to perceive and recognize objects. It is accordingly called the What processing stream. The dorsal
stream processes information about where objects are in
space and how to act upon them. It is accordingly called
the Where processing stream, and also the How processing stream a!er the work of Melvyn Goodale and David
Milner in the early 1990s (e.g., Goodale and Milner, 1992)
about the role of the dorsal stream in spatial representation and action.
Figure 1.19 illustrates these two streams. I will suggest
below how key aspects of learning in the two streams differ,
notably that processing in these streams seems to obey
computationally complementary laws. As noted above, the
word “complementary” means that the properties in one
stream are related to those in the other stream in much the
same way as a key #ts into a lock, or as pieces in a puzzle
#t together. Complementarity implies the need to balance
the capabilities of each stream against those of the other.
Only one of these two types of processing is capable
of supporting conscious experiences. Although we can be
consciously aware of our perceptual and cognitive experiences, we do not have the same sort of conscious representation of a motor command. A motor command does
not support conscious sensations like the brightness of an
object or the pitch of a sound. We can consciously will a
motor command to occur by an act of volition. But this
is not the same thing as consciously experiencing the

Overview

internal representation of the command itself. This difference in conscious awareness will be traced below to differences in how we process and learn about these two types
of experiences. Indeed, I will suggest that the learning
process that solves the stability-plasticity dilemma is controlled by resonant brain states that can support conscious
mental experiences; hence, the title of this book. Motor
learning does not solve the stability-plasticity dilemma,
does not utilize resonant dynamics, and hence does not
support a conscious experience.

Two revolutionary paradigms:
Complementary Computing
and Laminar Computing
These comments about computationally complementary
properties illustrate one of the revolutionary computational paradigms that are needed to understand how
brains give rise to minds, and whose importance cannot
be overemphasized. These paradigms embody computational constraints that any general-purpose autonomous
intelligent system, not just brains, need in order to selforganize adaptive behaviors in response to a changing
world. Students of physics may notice that these paradigms include processes that seem to have analogs in
modern physical theories, such as principles of complementarity, uncertainty, and resonance. I will comment
about why this may be below, and will offer a more detailed discussion in Chapter 17. If my view is correct, then
it points to future progress in the development of physical
theory that will enable theories of mind and brain to be
better assimilated into a more uni#ed physical theory of
the external world.
Complementary processing streams for perception/
cognition and space/action. I have called this paradigm
Complementary Computing because it describes how the
brain is organized into complementary parallel processing streams whose interactions generate biologically intelligent behaviors. A single cortical processing stream can
individually compute some properties well, but cannot,
by itself, process other computationally complementary
properties. Pairs of complementary cortical processing
streams interact, using multiple processing stages, to generate emergent properties that overcome their complementary de#ciencies to compute complete information
with which to represent or control some faculty of intelligent behavior. Table 1.1 lists some of these pairs of complementary streams.
For example, as noted in the previous section, processes of object attention, category learning, recognition,

|

29

TABLE 1.1. Some pairs of complementary
cortical processing streams.
SOME COMPLEMENTARY PROCESSES
Visual Boundary

Visual Surface

Interblob Stream V1-V2-V4

Blob Stream V1-V2-V4

Visual Boundary

Visual Motion

Interblob Stream V1-V2-V4

Magno Stream V1-MT-MST

WHAT Steam

WHERE Stream

Perception & Recognition

Space & Action

Inferotemporal and
Prefrontal areas

Parietal and Prefrontal areas

Object Tracking

Optic Flow Navigation

MT– Interbands and MSTv

MT+ Bands and MSTd

Motor Target Position

Volitional Speed

Motor and Parietal Cortex

Basal Ganglia

and prediction are part of the ventral, or What, cortical
processing stream for perception and cognition. The ventral stream exhibits properties that are o!en computationally complementary to those of the dorsal, or Where and
How, cortical processing steam for spatial representation
and action. One reason for this What-Where complementarity is that the What stream learns object recognition
categories that are substantially invariant under changes in
an object’s view, size, and position. These invariant object
categories enable our brains to recognize a valued object
quickly, and without experiencing the combinatorial explosion that could occur if we needed to search individual
exemplars of the object in order to recognize it. However,
because they are invariant, these categories cannot locate
and act upon a desired object in space. Where stream
spatial and motor representations can locate objects and
trigger actions towards them, but cannot recognize them.
By interacting together, the What and Where streams
can recognize valued objects and direct appropriate goaloriented actions towards them. How this happens will be
explained in Chapter 6.
Table 1.2 summarizes basic complementary properties of the What and Where cortical streams. As will be
discussed in Chapter 5, perceptual/cognitive processes in
the What stream o!en use ART-like excitatory matching
and match-based learning to create self-stabilizing categorical representations of objects and events that solve
the stability-plasticity dilemma. They thereby enable increasing expertise, and an ever-expanding sense of self, to
emerge throughout life.
Table 1.2 also shows that complementary spatial/motor
processes in the Where stream o!en use inhibitory matching

30

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

The What and Where cortical
processing streams obey computationally
complementary laws. These laws enable
the What stream to rapidly and stably learn
invariant object categories without experiencing
catastrophic forgetting, while the Where stream
learns labile spatial and action representations
to control actions that are aimed towards these
objects.
TABLE 1.2.

WHAT

WHERE

Spatially-invariant object
learning and recognition

Spatially-variant reaching and
movement

Fast learning without
catastrophic forgetting

Continually update sensorymotor maps and gains

IT

PPC
WHAT

WHERE

MATCHING

EXCITATORY

INHIBITORY

LEARNING

MATCH

MISMATCH

and mismatch-based learning to continually update spatial
maps and motor controllers that can effectively control our
changing bodies throughout life. As explained in Chapter
12, inhibitory matching can take place by subtracting from
a representation of where we want to move one that computes where we are now. When we arrive at where we want
to be, these two representations code for the same position
in space, so the match equals zero. This kind of inhibitory
matching cannot solve the stability-plasticity dilemma,
and thus spatial and motor learning does experience catastrophic forgetting. This is a good property when it occurs
during spatial and motor learning, because we need to
forget the spatial maps and motor control parameters that
were used to move our bodies when we were younger, so
that they can continue to learn how to accurately move our
changing bodies throughout life. Likewise, because excitatory matching is needed to generate resonances that support conscious internal representations, spatial and motor
memories, which are o!en called procedural memories
(Cohen and Squire, 1980; Scoville and Milner, 1957; Squire
and Cohen, 1984), cannot generate conscious internal
representations.
Together these complementary processes create a
self-stabilizing perceptual/cognitive front end in the
What stream for learning about the world and becoming
conscious of it, while it intelligently commands more
labile spatial/motor processes in the Where stream that
control our changing bodies. Thus, if only due to the

complementary organization of the brain, ART is not “a
theory of everything”.
Our bilateral brains use cerebral dominance to do
complementary computing: Split brains. The fact that
cognitive and motor processes use computationally complementary laws occurs within a body that exhibits bilateral symmetry, with two (approximately) symmetrically
placed eyes, arms, and legs, and a brain that is divided into
two communicating halves to control it. If both halves of
the brain equally well controlled cognitive and motor processes, that would be both redundant and a possible source
of confusion in determining which half would have its say.
This bilateral symmetry is, however, known not to be
perfect. For example, some people are right handed and
some le! handed. This broken symmetry is sometimes
referred to as cerebral dominance, with the right half of
the brain controlling the le! half of the body, and conversely. John Hughlings Jackson was perhaps the #rst
neurologist to comment on cerebral dominance in 1874
(Jackson, 1874).
It has also been known for a long time that the le!
half of the brain is more involved in the control of more
analytic temporal processes such as speech and language,
calculating, reading, and writing, whereas the right half
of the brain is more involved in the control of more holistic spatial processes such as navigating a maze, judging
visual distance or direction, and recognizing visual scenes
and auditory tones. Chapters 3-5, 9, and 11 will, among
others, discuss basic spatial processes that are involved
in seeing, recognizing, and navigating, and Chapter 12,
among others, will discuss basic processes that are involved in speech, language, and other sequentially controlled behaviors.
These biases do not imply that the non-dominant hemisphere has no role to play in carrying out the processes of
the dominant hemisphere. Rather, I have found it helpful to
think of cerebral dominance as a kind of symmetry-breaking
whereby higher cortical areas in one of the hemispheres
may be more devoted to spatial or temporal processing, respectively. Indeed, one can perfectly well see through either
eye, but higher-order spatial processing may be elaborated
in the right hemisphere of a right-handed person.
The subsequent chapters will explain that the mechanisms which reset spatial and temporal representations are
different. Indeed, both spatial inputs such as visual images,
and temporal inputs such as lists of items that are experienced one at a time, are transformed by our brains into
spatial patterns of activation at higher processing stages.
The distinct spatial and temporal reset mechanisms convert these spatial activity patterns into either spatial or
temporal rehearsals. This kind of mechanistic specialization casts additional light on why cerebral dominance has
evolved.

Overview

Fascinating data about cerebral dominance have been
collected since the pioneering studies of Roger Sperry and
his student Michael Gazzaniga (Gazzaniga, 1967; Sperry,
1964) from split brain patients. In these patients, the corpus
callosum that connects their two hemispheres is severed,
so that communication between the two hemispheres is
greatly reduced. As a result, Sperry could write in his 1964
famous review that “if the connections are cut, the organism functions quite well but behaves much as though it
had two brains”. For example, a typical split brain patient
who is exposed to flashing lights in the le! visual #eld,
which projects to the right hemisphere, cannot report that
experience using language because speech processing is
dominant in the le! hemisphere. Sperry was awarded the
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1981 for this discovery, and Gazzaniga went on to become a key founder of
the #eld of cognitive neuroscience. Mike Gazzaniga and I
actually graduated from Dartmouth College in the same
1961 class, and have reminisced about how we used to sit
near each other in large exam rooms where student seats
were assigned in alphabetical order.
Laminar neocortical circuits to represent higherorder biological intelligence. A second revolutionary

|

31

computational paradigm is called Laminar Computing.
Laminar Computing describes how the entire cerebral
cortex is organized into layered circuits whose specializations support all higher-order biological intelligence
(Figure 1.20). The laminar circuits realize a revolutionary computational synthesis that has been shown, in a
series of my articles since 1999, to combine properties of
feedforward and feedback processing, digital and analog
processing, and data-driven bottom-up processing and
hypothesis-driven top-down processing (Grossberg,
2007b, 2013a, 2017a, 2017b). ART mechanisms have, to
the present, been naturally embodied in laminar cortical
models of vision, speech, and cognition, speci#cally in the
3D LAMINART model of 3D vision and #gure-ground
separation (see Chapter 11), the cARTWORD model of
speech perception (see Chapter 12), and the LIST PARSE
model of cognitive working memory and planning (see
Chapter 12). Each model uses variations of the same canonical laminar cortical circuitry, thereby providing
additional insights into how specialized resonances use
similar types of circuits to support different conscious experiences. By showing how different kinds of intelligence
can be realized using variations of the same laminar circuit design, these models also clarify how different kinds

FIGURE 1.20. A schematic cross-section of a slice of laminar neocortex whose cells are organized in a characteristic way in six layers,
which themselves may be organized into distinct sublaminae. The computational paradigm of Laminar Computing attempts to show how
different parts of neocortex can represent and control very different kinds of behavior —including vision, speech, and cognition—using
specializations of the same canonical laminar cortical design.

32

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

of intelligent computation can be joined together into a
larger autonomous adaptive system, whether that system
is the brain or a VLSI chip that controls an intelligent
agent in technology.

Complementary Computing
vs. Independent Modules
Before properties of complementary computing were discovered, many scientists believed that our brains possess
different kinds of information using independent modules,
as in a digital computer. An independent module may be
thought of as a little piece of computing machinery that
is very good at processing one type of information. Such
modules are “specialists” or “experts” at doing a limited
task, and intelligent behavior was proposed to arise from
the collective action of many such specialists. For example,
it was proposed that we see by separately processing perceptual qualities such as luminance, motion, binocular
disparity, color, and texture, using independent brain
modules, and then somehow put all of these qualities together to derive a uni#ed visual percept.
The brain does have many regions that carry out specialized functions, but this does not imply that they are
independent modules. As illustrated in Figure 0.1, the
brain is organized in parallel processing streams. This is
true at all levels of brain organization, including vision.
The simpli#ed circuit diagram in Figure 1.21, which was
published by Edgar DeYoe and David van Essen in 1988
(DeYoe and van Essen, 1988), shows that the processing of
visual stimuli uses at least three processing streams, one
through the V1 blobs, another through the V1 interblobs,
and the third through V1 layer 4B. These streams, in turn,
influence higher-level What and Where cortical regions
such as inferotemporal cortex (IT) and posterior parietal
cortex (PPC) in multiple ways (Figure 1.19).
Proponents of “independent modules” have looked
to such processing streams to support their proposal.
The existence of processing streams certainly supports
the idea that brain processing is specialized, but it does
not imply that these streams contain independent modules. Independent modules should be able to fully compute their particular processes on their own. As I noted
in the Preface, much perceptual data over the last century
argue against such independence, because strong interactions are known to occur between perceptual qualities. In
particular, changes in perceived form or color can cause
changes in perceived motion, and conversely. Changes
in perceived brightness can cause changes in perceived
depth, and conversely. Just making an object in a picture
brighter can make it look closer, relative to other objects in
the scene, a property that was called proximity-luminance

FIGURE 1.21. At least three parallel visual cortical streams
respond to visual inputs that reach the retina. Two parvocellular
streams process visual surfaces (blob stream) and visual boundaries (interblob stream). The magnocellular stream processes visual
motion.

covariance by Barry Schwartz and George Sperling in
1983, and by Barbara Dosher, Sperling, and Stephen Wurst
in 1986 (Dosher, Sperling, and Wurst, 1986; Schwartz and
Sperling, 1983). How and why do these qualities interact?
An answer to this question is needed to determine the
functional and computational units that govern behavior
as we know it.
I have proposed that the brain’s organization is much
more interesting than a collection of independent modules, and that these processing streams compute computationally complementary properties. Table 1.1 lists some of
the pairs of brain processes (in each row) that our neural
models assert to be computationally complementary, along
with where they occur in the brain.
Each of these pairs of processes exhibits complementary strengths and weaknesses. For example, Table 1.1
(top row) asserts that visual boundaries and surfaces are
complementary. These are the processing streams that are
marked in red and green, respectively in Figure 1.21. How
do their complementary properties get synthesized into a
uni#ed behavioral experience? Our neural models have
shown how appropriately designed interactions between
these processes overcome their complementary de#ciencies and generate psychological properties that realize the
unity of conscious experiences. These interactions occur
between many thousands of nerve cells, in multiple processing stages, through time. That is one reason why efforts to link brain to mind have been so difficult: The functional units that control emergent behaviors are not easy
to localize in the brain. Instead, pairs of complementary
processing streams are the brain’s functional units, because

Overview

only through their interactions can key psychological
properties be competently computed.
Analogies like a key #tting its lock, or puzzle pieces
#tting together, albeit suggestive, do not fully capture the
dynamism of what complementarity means in the brain.
Chapter 3 will begin to clarify what complementarity
means by explaining why and how visual boundaries
and surfaces obey complementary laws, and how they interact to overcome their computationally complementary
de#ciencies.

|

33

are realized within processing streams, such as those summarized in Table 1.1, better explain the brain’s functional
organization than concepts about independent modules.
Given this conclusion, we need to ask: If the brain and
the physical world are both organized according to such
principles, then in what way is the brain different from the
types of physical theories that are already well-known?
Why haven’t good theoretical physicists already “solved”
the brain using known physical theories?

Hierarchical resolution
of uncertainty and
complementary consistency

Differences between
physical and brain
measurements:
Self-organization

Figures 0.1 and 1.21 illustrate that the brain o!en needs
several processing stages to form a processing stream.
Why is this necessary? Accumulating evidence supports
my prediction that these stages realize a process of hierarchical resolution of uncertainty. “Uncertainty” is o!en
due to the fact that computing one set of properties at a
given stage can suppress information about a complementary set of properties at that stage. These uncertainties are overcome by using more than one processing stage
to recover these lost properties. These several processing
stages together form a processing stream. Overcoming
informational uncertainty thus utilizes both hierarchical
interactions within each stream and parallel interactions
between streams to overcome their complementary de#ciencies. When these uncertainties are overcome, the
brain has achieved a consistent solution of an environmental problem. I like to summarize this state of affairs
by saying that the brain has then achieved complementary
consistency.
Given this background, if a friend asks you why there
are so many processing stages in the brain, one pithy
answer is: to achieve Complementary Consistency!
Complementarity and uncertainty principles also arise
in physics, notably in quantum mechanics. Since brains
form part of the physical world, and interact ceaselessly
with it to adapt to environmental challenges, it is perhaps
not surprising that brains also obey principles of complementarity and uncertainty. Indeed, each brain is a measurement device for recording and analyzing events in the
physical world. In fact, the human brain can detect even
small numbers of the photons that give rise to percepts of
light, and is tuned just above the noise level of phonons
that give rise to percepts of sound.
Experimental and theoretical evidence will be summarized in several chapters in support of the hypothesis
that principles of complementarity and uncertainty that

The progress of physical theory during the past few centuries has led to a progressively deeper understanding of
how we know the world through physical measurements.
In Newton’s mechanics, events were measured within
absolute spatial and temporal coordinates, and instantaneous action at a distance was permitted. In Einstein’s
Special Relativity Theory, the #nite velocity of light was
shown to have important effects on physical measurements (Einstein, 1905). Measurements of one system by
another system were shown as a result to depend on their
relative motion. Quantum Mechanics carried the theory
of measurement even further by showing that the particles
used to carry out measurements could influence the results of such measurements, thereby creating unavoidable
measurement uncertainties that were summarized in the
Uncertainty Principle of Werner Heisenberg (Heisenberg,
1927). The Uncertainty Principle identi#ed complementary variables, such as the position and momentum of a
particle, that could not both be measured with perfect precision. In all of these theories, however, the measurer who
was initiating and recording measurements remained outside the measurement process.
When we try to understand the brain, this is no longer
possible. The brain is the measurement device, and the
process of understanding mind and brain is the study of
how brains measure the world. The measurement process
is hereby brought into physical theory to an unprecedented degree. As a result of their measurement processes,
brains can alter their structure, through development and
learning, in response to the signals that they are measuring, and do so at a remarkably rapid rate. Brains can
also unify into coherent moments of conscious experience
within a uni#ed self measurements taken from multiple
physical sources—light, sound, pressure, temperature,
bodily biochemical processes, and the like. The brain is

34

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

thus a universal self-organizing measurement system of the
world, and in the world.
As such, advanced brains play a role in biology that
is reminiscent of the role played in physics by the law of
black-body radiation that was described in 1900 by the
great German physicist and Nobel Laureate Max Planck
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Black-body_radiation). This
law describes a radiation spectrum that is universal across
all matter, and ushered in the revolution of Quantum
Theory that rapidly developed into Quantum Mechanics.
Since brains are also universal measurement devices, how
do they differ from these more classical physical ideas? I
believe that it is the brain’s ability to rapidly self-organize,
through development and life-long learning, that sets it
apart from previous physical theories. The brain thus represents a new frontier in measurement theory for the physical sciences, no less than the biological sciences. It remains
to be seen how physical theories will develop to increasingly incorporate concepts about the self-organization of
matter, and how these theories will be related to the special
case of brain self-organization.

Universal designs for selforganizing measurement
and prediction systems
Implicit in these conclusions is the fact that the principles,
mechanisms, and architectures that are derived, explained,
and applied in this book are about fundamental problems
of measurement, and about how a self-organizing measurement system can successfully represent and predict
outcomes in a changing world. Mind and brain data are
successfully explained and predicted by these theories because brains are a natural computational embodiment of
these principles, mechanisms, and architectures. These
ingredients can also equally be applied to the design and
implementation of future autonomous adaptive intelligent
agents of multiple kinds.

Is the conscious present in
the physical past?
Measurements of the world occur in both space and time.
When we have a conscious experience of the world, it is
o!en so vivid that it seems to de#ne the here-and-now.
A!er all, if conscious experiences do not de#ne what is
happening to us now, then what does? In reality, however,
many events that we are conscious of now o!en actually
occurred a tenth, or even a #!h, of a second ago. This may

not sound like a very long time at #rst, but when you think
about the fact that the neurons of the brain operate ten
to one hundred times faster than that, it becomes quite a
paradox. It is also a little strange to realize that the words
that you are saying in a conversation now will not be consciously heard by the listener until 50 to 150 milliseconds
later, and that the same is true about the words that they
are saying to you. This fact alone suggests that we do not
“directly” hear the acoustic signals that are in the world.
How, and why, do our conscious percepts of sound differ
from these acoustic signals? In particular, to what extent
are our conscious percepts of speech and language auditory illusions?

Phonemic restoration and
stable learning about a
changing world
A famous example of such a delay in conscious awareness during the perception of speech and language was
described by the American psychologist Richard Warren
and his colleagues starting in 1970. It is called phonemic
restoration. In the study of Richard and Roslyn Warren in
that year (Warren and Warren, 1970), the spectrogram of
the word “legislatures” (Figure 1.22, top row) is manipulated. In one manipulation, a phoneme such as the #rst /
s/ in the word “legislatures” is excised, and replaced by
broad-band noise. Broad-band noise includes all sound
frequencies within the audible range (Figure 1.22, bottom
row). Then the excised phoneme is perceived by listeners
as being present and intact in the stimulus. When the phoneme is removed and simply replaced by silence (Figure
1.22, middle row), then the silent gap is perceived and no
such restoration occurs. The exact cues that determined
these percepts were not fully controlled in cases where
“legislatures” was presented as part of a sentence such as
“The state governors met with their respective legislatures
convening in the capital city”.
Additional experiments showed that the phoneme that
is restored, and consciously heard, depends only on acoustic
signals that arrive after the broad-band noise is presented,
thereby strikingly illustrating how conscious percepts can
depend upon events that occur later in time. For example,
Richard Warren and Gary Sherman showed this in 1974
(Warren and Sherman, 1974). Their study considers two
words, ‘delivery’ and ‘deliberation’, that are contextually
neutral until the /v/ or /b/. Before presentation of /v/ or /
b/, the initial portions of the two words, ‘deli’ are virtually
indistinguishable and do not contain sufficient coarticulatory information to predict whether /v/ or /b/ will follow.
A!er presentation of ‘deli’, /v/ and /b/ are both deleted and

Overview

|

35

FIGURE 1.22. A classical example of phonemic restoration. The spectrogram of the word “legislatures” is either excised, leaving a silent
interval, or filled with broad-band noise. A percept of the restored phoneme is heard when it is replaced by noise, but not by silence.

replaced by broad-band noise. The ‘deli#’ speech segment
is then followed by either ‘ery’ or ‘eration’. Presentation of
‘ery’ results in the perceptual restoration of the phoneme /v/
, whereas presentation of ‘eration’ results in the restoration
of the phoneme /b/. This does not, however, happen if the
deleted segments are not replaced by noise.
How does a future disambiguating cue (‘y’ or ‘ation’
in ‘delivery’ and ‘deliberation’, respectively) influence the
earlier ambiguous stimulus ‘deli#’ in such a way that a different restored word, ‘delivery’ or ‘deliberation’, respectively, can be consciously heard in the correct temporal
order, and without interfering with the conscious perception of the intervening word segment ‘er’? Why does this
not happen if there is no noise?
This type of auditory illusion is a percept that we consciously hear—it is a phonemic restoration effect—and is
not just due to a symbolic hypothesis about the meaning of
the sentence. The evidence for this conclusion was strengthened by the American psychologist Arthur Samuel during
the 1980s; e.g., Samuel (1981a, 1981b). Samuel showed
that, if the noise does not contain all the frequencies of
the expected sound, then the restored sound will be distorted to include only the frequencies in the noise that are
part of the expected sound. Thus, our brains can select the

expected sound from a noise that contains it, but cannot
create a new sound out of silence. That is why, when silence replaces noise—as when only ‘deli ery’ or ‘deli eration’ is presented—only silence is heard in the position of
the missing phoneme /v/ or /b/, since silence contains no
frequencies that can be selected, so no phonemic restoration is possible.
Warren and Sherman (1974) also demonstrated a role
for sentence context in phonemic restoration. During
a typical experiment of this kind, a listener may hear a
broad-band noise /#/ followed immediately by the rapidly
uttered words “eel was on the . . . ”. If the next word a!er
“the” is “wagon”, and all the words are uttered quickly
enough, then the listener hears “wheel” instead of “#eel”
in the sentence “wheel was on the wagon”. Likewise, if the
last word is “shoe”, the listener hears the sentence “heel
was on the shoe”. If the last word is “orange”, the listener
hears “peel was on the orange”. And so on. Thus, although
the noise is received by the brain several words before the
last word of the sentence was received, the listener may not
consciously hear the noise. Rather, the listener may consciously hear the sound that is expected based on his or her
past learning experiences with the English language. This
example again shows that future sounds can influence the

36

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

past sounds that we consciously hear, and that the meaning
of an entire sentence can disambiguate, or restore, heard
sounds that would otherwise be lost in noise. This is clearly
an important bene#t when we try to hear anything in this
noisy world of ours.
This example provides further evidence that phonemic
restoration is a phonemic restoration effect, and is not just
due to a symbolic hypothesis about the meaning of the
sentence. In particular, if the noise is replaced by an interval of silence in sentences like “eel is on the table” or “eel
is on the shoe”, then the entire meaning of the sentence is
changed. We do not infer the word “meal” in the #rst case
and “heel” in the second. In fact, the sentence “eel is on
the shoe” is heard just as it is said, and we understand it to
have a rather disgusting meaning that is totally different
from the meaning of “heel is on the shoe”.

Learned expectations again!
Resonance between item
chunks and list chunks
Phonemic restoration shows that we are o!en not consciously aware of the raw signals that enter our brains.
These signals initially activate cells at multiple processing
stages of the brain in a bottom-up way; that is, in a way
that proceeds from the outside world ever deeper into the
brain. Figure 1.23 schematizes in a simpli#ed way how two
of these stages might react as a sequence of items x, y, and
z is stored in a working memory through time. At #rst,
the items are stored through time in working memory
as an evolving spatial pattern of activity (cf. Figure 1.6)
across item categories, or item chunks, that respond selectively to each item (Figure 1.23a, lower processing level).
As these item categories are activated through time, they
generate bottom-up signals to the next processing level,
where list categories, or list chunks, are activated that respond selectively to particular sequences of item chunks
in working memory. Bottom-up interactions are also
said to be feedforward interactions. Figure 1.23a schematizes in a simple way the case where item chunks ‘x’
and ‘y’ are stored and activate list chunk ‘xy’ strongly
while only weakly activating, or priming, the list chunk
‘xyz’. The list chunk ‘xyz’ is at most weakly activated because item chunk ‘z’ is not yet stored in working memory.
There is thus insufficient evidence to strongly activate
chunk ‘xyz’.
A!er list chunk ‘xy’ is activated, it sends learned topdown expectation signals back to the working memory
(Figure 1.23b) where they select and amplify the activities
of the item chunks ‘x’ and ‘y’. Such a top-down expectation
is also called a feedback signal to the working memory.

FIGURE 1.23. As more items are stored in working memory
through time, they can select larger chunks with which to represent the longer list of stored items.

As these events unfold through time, additional items
may be stored in working memory, such as item ‘z’, thereby
enabling all the item chunks ‘x’, ‘y’, and ‘z’ to send bottomup signals to the corresponding list chunks (Figure 1.23c).
Now the list chunk ‘xyz’ does have enough inputs to #re
vigorously and to thereby quickly begin to inhibit list
chunk ‘xy’, as well as list chunks for all other subsets of
the list, while it also sends top-down expectation signals
to the working memory (Figure 1.23d). Now the working
memory item chunks ‘x’, ‘y’, and ‘z’ can send bottomup excitatory signals to the list chunk ‘xyz’, while they
also receive top-down excitatory signals from ‘xyz’. This
mutual exchange of excitatory feedback signals persists
long enough to reinforce the activities of all the affected
chunks, thereby leading to a state of resonance.
This simpli#ed circuit shows how, in response to an
evolving sequence of inputs through time, list chunks are
selected to provide the most predictive representation of
the items that are currently stored in working memory.
Figure 1.23 illustrates only the simple case of two levels of
processing, and one in which list items are not repeated, as
they are in many behaviors, whether in words like ‘mama’
or sentences like “Maybe I may be a mayor” and “Dog eats
dog”, or sequences of skilled actions that repeat a gesture, or navigational movements that repeat a right turn

Overview

at different street corners in an urban environment. Three
level circuits can easily overcome both limitations, as illustrated in Figure 1.24. This kind of circuit will be explained
more completely in Chapter 12. For the present, it suffices
to make the following comments:
Each of the three levels has a similar circuit design,
which is called an Item-Order-Rank, or IOR, working
memory that can store arbitrary sequences of item
chunks in working memory, including item chunks that
are repeated at different positions in a sequence, such as
ABACBD. Such repeats are said to have different “ranks”,
hence the name Item-Order-Rank.
The upper two IOR working memories are also called
Masking Fields because they are IOR working memories
that can stored sequences of item chunks, as in the second
level of Figure 1.23. However, the list chunks in a Masking
Field IOR can selectively respond to sequences of variable lengths, and can also store sequences with repeated
chunks. Their different processing capabilities are determined by their different positions in the hierarchy of processing stages, even though each processing level is built
from a similar circuit design.
In particular, each of the three levels is activated by a
bottom-up adaptive #lter and generates top-down expectation signals that focus attention at the preceding level
upon compatible combinations of item or list chunks.
The third level can already represent sentences with
repeated words, such as ‘Dog eats dog’, because a list category at level three can represent a sequence of list categories, including repeated list categories, at level two. Thus,
just a few properly designed network levels, all sharing the
same design, can represent complex sequential information, including full sentences with repeated words.
What makes these levels special? As I will explain
in Chapter 12, this particular design allows the brain to
quickly learn to categorize sequences of events without experiencing catastrophic forgetting. It clari#es, in particular,
how we can learn language, motor skills, and navigational
routines quickly and can remember them for a long time.
This example is just a case of Adaptive Resonance Theory
acting through time, or ART In Time, for short. The resonant state that binds together multiple levels in such a
processing hierarchy drives fast learning of the attended
sequential information.
Phonemic restoration illustrates that feedforward activations do not, in themselves, lead to conscious experiences. In order to have a conscious experience, learned
top-down expectations also need to be activated by the
list categories that respond to a particular list in working
memory, much as we learn to expect the #rst word to sound
like “heel” in response to the sequence ‘#eel was on the’
when the next word is “shoe”. The list chunks that readout these top-down expectations are sensitive to more
than one word in the sentence in order to unambiguously

|

37

FIGURE 1.24. Only three processing stages are needed to learn
how to store and categorize sentences with repeated words in
working memory. See the text for more discussion.

compute that “heel” goes with “shoe” but “wheel” goes
with “wagon”. Such expectations are sensitive to whole sequences of word sounds, as in the Masking Field of level
three in Figure 1.24. As an expectation gets activated by a
particular sequence of word sounds, it sends a top-down,
or feedback, signal to the working memory where the sequences of individual words (level two) and word sounds
(level one) are being stored. There, at cells that have already
been activated by the many frequencies of the broad-band
noise, the expectation selects and ampli#es the activities
of cells whose frequencies are consistent with it, while the
activities of other cells are suppressed.
These are the spectral components to which we will
“pay attention”, much as list chunk ‘xy’ attentively supports item chunks ‘x’ and ‘y’ in Figure 1.23b only to be
supplanted by list chunk ‘xyz’ which, in turn, attentively
supports item chunks ‘x’, ‘y’, and ‘z’ in Figure 1.23d. As
the cells that comprise this emerging attentional focus
start to get ampli#ed by sufficiently sustained top-down
expectations, they reactivate the bottom-up pathways
that activated the expectation in the #rst place, until the
whole bottom-up and top-down feedback process equilibrates. The activation of these top-down expectations,
the focusing of attention, and the equilibration between
the bottom-up and top-down interactions take awhile to
occur. This lag enables future contextual events, such as
the words “shoe” or “wagon”, to influence which expectations can influence the processing of earlier words. During
phonemic restoration, we consciously hear the restored
sound only a!er the expectations that are activated by the
entire sentential context get a chance to act upon it. That is
why our conscious experiences lag behind their inducing
sensory events.

38

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

How does object attention
work? ART Matching Rule
The process by which object attention focuses upon
compatible item or list chunks obeys what is called the
ART Matching Rule. Gail Carpenter and I mathematically proved in the 1980s that this Rule is needed to
dynamically stabilize the learning of new recognition
categories (Figures 1.23 and 1.24), and thereby solve
the stability-plasticity dilemma; e.g., Carpenter and
Grossberg (1987a). Figure 1.25 summarizes the kind of
brain circuit that embodies the ART Matching Rule, in
all the brain regions where this Rule occurs in the brain:
a top-down, modulatory on-center, off-surround circuit
that reads out the learned expectations to be matched
against bottom-up input patterns. This is the circuit that
carries out the excitatory matching process that is summarized in Table 1.2. This matching process has the following properties:
When a bottom-up input pattern (upward facing
green pathways) is received at a processing stage of feature detectors, it can activate its target cells, if nothing
else is happening. When an active category reads-out a
top-down expectation (downward facing green pathways),
it can provide excitatory modulatory, or priming, signals
to cells in its on-center, and driving inhibitory signals to
cells in its off-surround, if nothing else is happening. The
on-center can only modulate the activities of its targeted
feature detectors because the off-surround (red pathways)
also inhibits the on-center cells (Figure 1.25), and these
excitatory and inhibitory inputs are approximately balanced (“one-against-one”). As a result, a top-down expectation cannot, by itself, fully activate its target cells. When
a bottom-up input pattern and a top-down expectation are

FIGURE 1.25. The ART Matching Rule stabilizes real time
learning using a top- down, modulatory on- center, off-surround
network. Object attention is realized by such a network. See text
for additional discussion.

both active, cells that receive both bottom-up excitatory
inputs and top-down excitatory priming signals can #re
(“two-against-one”), while other cells are inhibited (“oneagainst-one”). In this way, only cells can #re whose features are “expected” by the top-down expectation, and an
attentional focus starts to form at these cells.
As I will explain in Chapter 5, the properties of the
ART Matching Rule, naturally explain the properties of
phonemic restoration, notably how future context can influence past conscious percepts, why restoration occurs
when noise replaces phonetic information, and why restoration does not occur without noise. With this explanation in hand, phonemic restoration no longer seems to be a
charming, but unimportant, phenomenon. Rather, it uses
the processes whereby the brain can solve the stabilityplasticity dilemma and thereby learn quickly without also
catastrophically forgetting useful memories. Phonemic
restoration hereby supports the prediction that the ART
Matching Rule enables speech and language to be learned
quickly, without risking catastrophic forgetting.

All conscious states are
resonant states
These interacting bottom-up and top-down processes give
rise to a resonant state in the brain. As explained in greater
detail in subsequent chapters, a resonance is a dynamical
state during which neuronal #rings across a brain network
are ampli#ed and synchronized when they interact via
reciprocal excitatory feedback signals during a matching
process that occurs between bottom-up and top-down
pathways, as illustrated by Figures 1.23 and 1.24. O!en
the activities of these synchronized cells oscillate in phase
with one another. Resonating cell activities also focus attention upon a subset of cells, thereby clarifying how the
brain can become conscious of attended events.
I predicted in the 1970s that “all conscious states are
resonant states”, and that resonant states can trigger rapid
learning about a changing world without causing catastrophic forgetting, thereby solving the stability-plasticity
dilemma. A resonance represents a kind of system-wide
consensus that the attended information is worthy of being
learned. Because resonances can trigger fast learning, they
are called adaptive resonances, which is why I called the
theory Adaptive Resonance Theory, or ART. ART’s proposed solution of the stability-plasticity dilemma mechanistically links the process of stable learning with the
mechanisms of expectation, attention, resonance, and synchrony that enable it, while also clarifying why our conscious experiences can lag behind their initiating sensory
events. Because of these mechanistic relationships, I like to
group together the processes of Consciousness, Learning,

Overview

Expectation, Attention, Resonance, and Synchrony, and
o!en abbreviate them as the CLEARS processes.
ART hereby predicts that all brain representations that
solve the stability-plasticity dilemma use variations of
CLEARS mechanisms. The CLEARS mechanisms clarify
why many animals are intentional and attentional beings
who use learned expectations to pay attention to salient
objects and events, why “all conscious states are resonant
states”, and how brains can learn both many-to-one maps
(representations whereby many object views, positions,
and sizes all activate the same invariant object category)
and one-to-many maps (representations that enable us to
expertly know many things about individual objects and
events). I explain these and many other properties of ART
in Chapter 5.

The emergence of self, the
longing for unity, and the
appeal of monotheism
Resonances enable data from all of our external senses, including sight, sound, and touch, as well as internal senses
that give rise to our emotions and conscious feelings, to
be bound together into coherent moments of uni#ed
conscious experience, rather than being just a jumble of
disjoint sense impressions, and enable us to consciously
know what these experiences are. We hereby overcome the
“blooming buzzing confusion” that the world presents us
with every day.
This book will focus upon resonances that support conscious seeing, hearing, feeling, and knowing (Table 1.3).
With resonance as a mediating event that binds together
attended representations in widely separated brain areas
while we stably accumulate knowledge about the world, a
uni#ed sense of self can emerge, as well as a longing for a
uni#ed view of the world. The system-wide unity and coherence of resonances may be one of the wellsprings of religious
as well as scienti#c thought. It is through the binding of
multiple types of information through adaptive resonances
that brains act like universal self-organizing measurement
systems which overcome the limitations of computationally
complementary cortical processing streams.

The link between consciousness
and movement.
TABLE 1.3.

VISUAL seeing, knowing, and reaching
AUDITORY hearing, knowing, and speaking
EMOTIONAL feeling, knowing, and acting

|

39

Invariant learning,
expectation, and cognitiveemotional resonance in
early religious beliefs
A few more remarks about how ART dynamics in our
brains may influence religious and scienti#c thought will
be briefly mentioned here in order to illustrate the scope
of the insights that ART enables. Chapter 17 will provide
additional discussion.
As noted in the discussion of attentional blocking and
unblocking (Figure 1.10), our brains generate hypotheses
about the world using learned expectations that may be
con#rmed or discon#rmed by subsequent events (Figure
1.11). Using the ART Matching Rule (Figure 1.25), an
active top-down expectation that is discon#rmed by a
current situation can suppress the discon#rmed features
in the expectation, while shi!ing attention to focus upon
feature combinations that will subsequently lead to con#rmed expectations in that situation.
Although these mechanisms usually work amazingly
well, they also have shortcomings. One shortcoming is
that different people may use different feature and event
combinations to predict the same outcomes. If an environment does not require precise testing of expectations, then
some expectations, and the beliefs that arise from them,
may include irrelevant information, or may at best correlate with outcomes without causing them. When humans
in primitive societies were confronted with the many aspects of their environments that they could not control,
it become possible to learn expectations that embodied
accidental correlations between cues and their outcomes,
leading to unfounded beliefs about the causes of health or
sickness, good or bad weather, crop fecundity or failure,
and other vitally important life experiences.
Powerlessness in the face of changing and demanding
environments can lead to a strong tendency towards belief
synthesis, or uni#cation, when it is combined with another fundamental type of brain process. This is the process whereby our brains learn invariant representations of
objects and events that will be described in greater detail
in Chapter 6, where I will discuss learning of invariant
visual recognition categories, and in Chapter 12, where I
will do the same for invariant speech recognition categories. An invariant representation is one that is activated
by many different feature and event combinations, much
as we can visually recognize our parents’ faces from multiple viewpoints, distances, and positions; or we can auditorily recognize language that is spoken by men, women,
and children in different acoustic frequency ranges and at
different rates. As these examples illustrate, by grouping
together many situational variations, invariant learning

40

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

can be incredibly useful. However, lumping together situational variations can also cause serious predictive errors to
occur. Indeed, as invariant categories of objects, persons,
or events are being learned, they also control learning of
expectations about outcomes which may, in fact, be accidental, but may not be discon#rmed if we are powerless
to control them, such as floods, volcano eruptions, disease
outbreaks, and the like. Unless and until they are discon#rmed, the cues that activate invariant categories may
continue to be recognized as being immanent in, and predictors of, accidentally correlated outcomes.
Invariant categories may also learn to trigger the
strong feelings that we experience during these outcomes,
via cognitive-emotional learning (e.g., see Figures 1.10 and
1.16). These feelings can include learned fear, say when a
the health of a loved one is expected to get worse, or an
emotional rebound of relief that is learned when this
fearful outcome is discon#rmed by an unexpected recovery (see Figures 1.14 and 1.15). Learned invariance, expectation, and cognitive-emotional interactions may hereby
combine to create strong synchronized cognitive and
cognitive-emotional resonances between sensory and prefrontal cortices and the amygdala (Figure 1.16) that support the beliefs that are consistent with the expectations,
and that can attentionally block discon#rming evidence,
at least if this evidence is sufficiently rare.
This sketch of some factors that may support strongly
held beliefs for which there is little evidence, including
religious beliefs, does not support or deny any particular
set of these beliefs. It does, however, clarify how religious
beliefs may persist in the lives of many people around the
world because of the way these beliefs engage fundamental
cognitive and emotional processes whereby humans try to
make sense of the world.
Scienti#c discovery is limited by the same combinations of cognitive and cognitive-emotional factors.
However, the scienti#c method is designed to carefully test
our expectations about the world, and to hereby efficiently
eliminate accidental correlations that are discon#rmed, as
it incrementally approaches an understanding of the true
causes of things.

Conscious seeing, hearing,
feeling, and knowing:
Linking consciousness
to action
As I will further document later in this chapter, many
philosophers have asked what kind of “event” occurs in
the brain during a conscious experience that is anything
more than just a “whir of information-processing”? They

have additionally asked: What happens when conscious
mental states “light up” and directly appear to the subject?
This book proposes that, over and above “just” information processing, our brains sometimes go into a contextsensitive resonant state that can involve multiple brain
regions. Because not all brain dynamics are resonant, consciousness is not just a “whir of information-processing”.
It is fair to ask: When does a resonant state embody a
conscious experience? Why is it conscious? And how do
different resonant states support different kinds of conscious experiences? The other side of the coin is equally
important: When does a resonant state fail to embody a
conscious experience?
In order to provide partial answers to these questions,
I will explain how various evolutionary challenges that
advanced brains face in order to adapt to changing environments have been overcome with particular conscious
states, and how these conscious states form part of larger
adaptive behavioral capabilities. In this regard, Adaptive
Resonance Theory argues that humans are not conscious
just to Platonically contemplate the beauty of the world.
Humans are conscious in order to enable them to better
adapt to the world’s changing demands. To illustrate these
claims, in addition to proposing how the brain generates
resonances that support particular conscious experiences
of seeing, hearing, feeling, and knowing, the book will
also explain how resonances for conscious seeing help to
ensure effective looking and reaching, resonances for conscious hearing help to ensure effective auditory communication and speaking, and resonances for conscious feeling
help to ensure effective actions towards valued goal objects
(Table 1.3). ART also proposes why different resonances
are triggered at the brain processing stages that they are,
and suggests how several functionally different kinds of
resonances can interact with one another, so that when we
consciously see a familiar valued object, we can also know
some things about it, and have appropriate feelings that are
directed towards it.

Why did consciousness
evolve?
In particular, the book will show how and why multiple
processing stages are needed before the brain can construct a complete and stable enough representation of the
information in the world with which to control effective
behaviors. This happens because the sensory signals that
our brains process are o!en noisy and ambiguous, as are
the representations that our brains form in response to
them at the earliest processing stages. Complementary
computing and hierarchical resolution of uncertainty
overcome these problems until perceptual representations

Overview

that are sufficiently complete, context-sensitive, and stable
can be formed. The brain regions where these representations are completed are different for seeing, hearing,
feeling, and knowing. But then how do our brains select
these representations? My proposed answer is: A resonant
state is generated that selectively “lights up” these representations and thereby renders them conscious. These conscious representations can then be used to trigger effective
behaviors.
Consciousness hereby enables our brains to prevent
the noisy and ambiguous information that is computed at
earlier processing stages from triggering actions that could
lead to disastrous consequences. Conscious states thus
provide an extra degree of freedom whereby the brain ensures that its interactions with the environment, whether
external or internal, are as effective as possible, given the
information at hand. These conclusions will be supported
by theoretical analyses throughout the book that enable
explanations of many psychological and neurobiological
data about normal and clinical behaviors that have no
other mechanistic explanations at the present time.

Self-stabilizing memories
and the challenge of learning
without bias through life
An emerging self can stabilize its learning by #ltering
experiences through resonant bottom-up and top-down
matching processes (Figures 1.23 and 1.24), much as we
perceive “heel” rather than “noise-eel” when restoring the
sentence “heel is on the shoe” during phonemic restoration. These matching processes dynamically buffer our
current knowledge against being catastrophically overwritten by novel experiences. They also extract a cost that
may become increasingly burdensome as we become older.
As we learn more and more about the world, it becomes
harder for new events to be experienced with a fresh eye.
Our difficulties in learning a new foreign language a!er a
certain age illustrate this problem. New languages need to
be #ltered by the language representations that we already
know. In contrast, if two or more languages are learned
simultaneously at an early enough age, they can, from the
start, organize bottom-up #lters to accommodate them
both. Novelty may thus become harder to experience as
an increasing number of experiences get matched against,
and possibly confused with, an ever richer repertoire of
previously learned expectations. Apart from the inevitable
decline of memory with age, the increased dynamic buffering and novelty-reducing effects of resonant matching as
we learn more about our world can make it harder to learn
new things as we get older.

|

41

These difficulties are part of the price we pay to stabilize the memories that enable us to enrich our sense of
self and to gain some wisdom with age. They are part of
the human condition. If we could just turn on a second or
third self with its own fresh #lters and expectations, then
we might not face this problem. But that would be tantamount to being someone else. And where is the satisfaction and wisdom in that?
One approach to successfully pursuing an interesting
life is to #gure out how to develop an ever-expanding
sense of self by seeking constructive new challenges which
previous knowledge can enhance, while still being novel
enough to escape the trap of rigid stability. Achieving a
balance between the satisfactions of a uni#ed self and its
established view of the world, and an adventurousness that
can keep our minds engaged in novel pursuits, is hard to
do, if only because we each develop our own personalized
de#nitions of novelty as our lives unfold on their unique
trajectories. We typically need to discover a productive
road on our own. Despite these difficulties, it is a comfort to realize that the nature of the problem derives from
basic qualities of our minds that we hold most dear, such
as being able to learn about an ever-changing world, develop a self, and have stable social relationships. It is something to be embraced, and worked with to the best of our
abilities.

The road to ART: Helmholtz,
James, and Gregory
The road towards the discovery of ART has a long history.
The great German psychologist, physiologist, and physicist
Hermann von Helmholtz realized during the nineteenth
century that expectations can greatly influence what we
see (Helmholtz, 1866). His concept is known as the doctrine of unconscious inference. This doctrine held that a raw
sensory experience, or perzeption, is modi#ed by previous
experiences via a learned imaginal increment, or vorstellung, before it becomes a true perception, or anschauung.
Thus Helmholtz realized that we perceive, in part, what
we expect to perceive based upon past learning. His realization of this was one of the factors that led him to leave
psychology towards the end of his life and to focus even
more on physics, since sufficient information, both empirical and mathematical, about how top-down expectations
are learned and how they interact with bottom-up sensory
data were not available at that time. Chapter 2 provides
more discussion of Helmholtz’s struggle.
Many other scientists since Helmholtz have had related ideas. These include some of the core concepts in
the doctrine of pragmatism that was espoused by the
great American psychologist William James during the

42

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

last half of the nineteenth century (James, 1907). More
recent thinkers, such as the influential British psychologist
Richard Gregory, who died in 2010, have discussed how
top-down cognitive contours might influence what we see
(Gregory, 1972). None of these thinkers seems to have realized, however, the critical role of the stability-plasticity
dilemma in guiding the brain’s design of these top-down
processes. It was only with the introduction of ART
that a quantitative synthesis of the CLEARS processes
of Consciousness, Learning, Expectation, Attention,
Resonance, and Synchrony became possible. The subsequent chapters will survey some of the fascinating phenomena about mind and brain, and their implications for
daily living, that can be given a uni#ed explanation from
this perspective.

The varieties of resonant
experiences during seeing,
hearing, feeling, and
knowing
As I remarked above, I have been able, as part of the development of ART, to begin classifying resonances that
support different types of conscious experiences, such as
the conscious experiences of seeing, hearing, feeling, and
knowing. Table 1.4 lists six of these different types of resonances, and the kind of conscious experiences that they
support. To #x ideas, let me list these resonances here; cf.
Grossberg (2017b). Later chapters will explain how they
work, where they occur in the brain and why, and some
of the fascinating psychological and neurobiological data
that they have enabled me to explain and predict.
Surface-shroud resonances are predicted to support conscious percepts of visual qualia (see Chapter 6).
Feature-category resonances are predicted to support
conscious recognition of visual objects and scenes (see
Chapter 5). Both kinds of resonances may synchronize
during conscious seeing and recognition. Stream-shroud
resonances are predicted to support conscious percepts of
auditory qualia (see Chapter 12). Spectral-pitch-and-timbre
resonances are predicted to support conscious recognition
of sources in auditory streams (see Chapter 12). Spectralshroud and spectral-pitch-and-timbre resonances may
synchronize during conscious hearing and recognition of
auditory streams. Item-list resonances are predicted to support recognition of speech and language (see Chapter 12).
They may synchronize with stream-shroud and spectralpitch-and-timbre resonances during conscious hearing of
speech and language, and build upon the selection of auditory sources by spectral-pitch-and-timbre resonances in
order to recognize the acoustical signals that are grouped

TABLE 1.4. The six main kinds of resonances
which support different kinds of conscious
awareness that will be explained and discussed
in this book.
TYPE OF RESONANCE

TYPE OF CONSCIOUSNESS

surface-shroud

see visual object or scene

feature- category

recognize visual object or scene

stream-shroud

hear auditory object or stream

spectral-pitch-and-timbre

recognize auditory object or stream

item-list

recognize speech and language

cognitive- emotional

feel emotion and know its source

together within these streams. Cognitive-emotional resonances are predicted to support conscious percepts of feelings, as well as recognition of the source of these feelings
(see Chapter 13). Cognitive-emotional resonances can
also synchronize with resonances that support conscious
qualia and knowledge about them.
All of these resonances have distinct anatomical substrates. Not all cells that sustain an adaptive resonance may
represent conscious contents of an experience. Subsequent
chapters explain why only cells that are sensitive to the
kinds of psychological discriminations (e.g., color, fear)
that are embodied within the conscious experience can
do this, and why these discriminations can occur only at
prescribed stages of brain processing. Neurophysiological
data about perceptual experiences like binocular rivalry
(see Chapter 11) illustrate this fact, and my neural models
about how the brain sees have explained, and indeed predicted, key properties of these data.
It cannot be overemphasized that these resonances are
not just correlates of consciousness. Rather, they embody
the subjective properties of individual conscious experiences, while also enabling effective behaviors to be elicited
(Table 1.3).

All conscious states are
resonant states, but some
resonant states are not
conscious
The ART prediction that “all conscious states are resonant states” provides a linking hypothesis between brain
mechanisms and psychological functions that enables our
explanations of consciousness to be experimentally tested.

Overview

It is the dynamical state that “lights up” to enable a conscious experience to occur, and is not just a “whir of information processing”. It is not, however, predicted that “all
resonant states are conscious states”. If, in fact, the concept
of resonance is more general than that of consciousness,
then the theory needs to explain why that is so, and how
conscious states arise from that more general function.
The resonances that are unconscious typically do not have
readily available names from day-to-day language. That is
because they do not include feature detectors that are activated by external senses, such as those that support vision
or audition, or internal senses, such as those that support
emotion, despite the fact that they are functionally important for survival.
For example, Chapter 12 will discuss parietalprefrontal resonances that are predicted to trigger the selective opening of basal ganglia gates to enable the read
out of context-appropriate thoughts and actions. These
gating actions subserve what we o!en intuitively think
of as volitional control. When they break down, lifethreatening problems like Parkinson’s disease may result.
Chapter 16 describes entorhinal-hippocampal resonances
that are predicted to dynamically stabilize the learning of
entorhinal grid cells and hippocampal place cells, which
play an important role in spatial navigation. Indeed, John
O’Keefe at University College London, and Edvard and
May-Britt Moser at the Norwegian University of Science
and Technology in Trondheim, Norway, won the 2014
Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their great experimental work in discovering hippocampal place cells
and entorhinal grid cells, respectively, and demonstrating
many of their most important psychological and neurobiological properties, many of which have been explained by
neural models.
All of these resonances, both the conscious ones and
the unconscious ones, help to solve the stability-plasticity
dilemma in their respective domains. As will be explained
in Chapter 12, brain dynamics can also occur that do not
include any possibility of resonance, notably during the
activation of spatial and motor representations (Table 1.2),
and thus may not support any conscious experiences for
that reason.

Towards solving the Hard
Problem of Consciousness:
A philosophical third rail?
My preceding remarks make the claim that, in effect, this
book is proposing major progress towards solving what is
called the Hard Problem of Consciousness; namely, it is
summarizing an emerging theory of the events that occur
in our brains when we have speci#c conscious experiences.

|

43

Before turning to the scienti#c results themselves, it
may be helpful to summarize what the Hard Problem of
Consciousness is, and the limits to what such a theory can
achieve.
First, what is the “hard problem of consciousness”? Wikipedia (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hard_
problem_of_consciousness) says: “The hard problem of
consciousness is the problem of explaining how and why
we have qualia or phenomenal experiences—how sensations acquire characteristics, such as colors and tastes”.
David Chalmers, who introduced the term ‘hard problem’
of consciousness, contrasts this with the ‘easy problems’ of
explaining the ability to discriminate, integrate information, report mental states, focus attention, etc. As Chalmers
(1995) has noted: “The really hard problem of consciousness is the problem of experience. When we think and perceive, there is a whir of information-processing, but there
is also a subjective aspect. As Nagel (1974) has put it, there
is something it is like to be a conscious organism. This subjective aspect is experience. When we see, for example, we
experience visual sensations: the felt quality of redness,
the experience of dark and light, the quality of depth in a
visual #eld. Other experiences go along with perception in
different modalities: the sound of a clarinet, the smell of
mothballs. Then there are bodily sensations, from pains
to orgasms; mental images that are conjured up internally;
the felt quality of emotion, and the experience of a stream
of conscious thought. What unites all of these states is that
there is something it is like to be in them. All of them are
states of experience”.
The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http://www.
iep.utm.edu/hard-con/) goes on to say: “The hard problem
of consciousness is the problem of explaining why any
physical state is conscious rather than nonconscious. It
is the problem of explaining why there is ‘something it is
like’ for a subject in conscious experience, why conscious
mental states ‘light up’ and directly appear to the subject.
The usual methods of science involve explanation of functional, dynamical, and structural properties—explanation
of what a thing does, how it changes over time, and how it
is put together. But even a!er we have explained the functional, dynamical, and structural properties of the conscious mind, we can still meaningfully ask the question,
Why is it conscious? This suggests that an explanation of
consciousness will have to go beyond the usual methods of
science. Consciousness therefore presents a hard problem
for science, or perhaps it marks the limits of what science
can explain. Explaining why consciousness occurs at all
can be contrasted with so-called ‘easy problems’ of consciousness: the problems of explaining the function, dynamics, and structure of consciousness. These features can
be explained using the usual methods of science. But that
leaves the question of why there is something it is like for
the subject when these functions, dynamics, and structures are present. This is the hard problem .(.(.(There seems

44

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

to be an unbridgeable explanatory gap between the physical world and consciousness. All these factors make the
hard problem hard”.
Philosophical opinions about the Hard Problem
are so diverse and strongly felt by their supporters, that
even attempting a possible scienti#c approach to solving
the Hard Problem may sometimes feel like stepping on
a philosophical “third rail”. This is because philosophers
vary passionately in their views between the claim that
no Hard Problem remains once it is explained how the
brain generates experience, as in the writings of Daniel
Dennett, to the claim that it cannot in principle be solved
by the scienti#c method, as in the writings of David
Chalmers. See the above reference for a good summary of
these opinions.

To what extent can any
scientific theory clarify the
Hard Problem?
This book will argue that Adaptive Resonance Theory
proposes answers, however incomplete, that respond to
various of these philosophical concerns by showing how
ART scienti#cally clari#es various of the distinctions
that philosophers have discussed. To link to the above
philosophical concerns, let me immediately note the
following:
First, it is fair to ask, as Chalmers does above, what
kind of “event” occurs in the brain during a conscious
experience that is anything more than just a “whir of
information-processing”? What happens when conscious
mental states “light up” and directly appear to the subject?
As I indicated above, I will show that that, over and above
“just” information processing, our brains sometimes go
into a context-sensitive resonant state that can involve
multiple brain regions. This discussion will explain some
of the abundant experimental evidence that “all conscious
states are resonant states”, just as phonemic restoration has
already illustrated (see Figures 1.22-1.24). Not all brain dynamics are “resonant”, and thus consciousness is not just a
“whir of information-processing”.
Second, it is fair to ask: When does a resonant state
embody a conscious experience? “Why is it conscious”?
And how do different resonant states support different
kinds of conscious qualia? The other side of the coin is
equally important: When does a resonant state fail to
embody a conscious experience? As I have already noted
above, advanced brains have evolved in response to various evolutionary challenges in order to adapt to changing
environments in real time. ART explains how consciousness enables such brains to better adapt to the world’s

changing demands, as summarized in Table 1.3, and how
the several functionally different kinds of resonances in
Table 1.4 can interact with one another.

A linking hypothesis
between resonant
brain dynamics and the
conscious mind
Before presenting more facts about ART, it is important
to also ask: How far can any scienti#c theory go towards
solving the Hard Problem? Let us suppose that a theory
exists whose neural mechanisms interact to generate dynamical states with properties that mimic the parametric
properties of the individual qualia that we consciously experience, notably the spatio-temporal patterning and dynamics of the resonant neural representations that represent these qualia. Suppose that these resonant dynamical
states, in addition to mirroring properties of subjective
reports of these qualia, predict properties of these experiences that are con#rmed by psychological and noninvasive neurobiological experiments on humans, and are
consistent with psychological, multiple-electrode neurophysiological data, and other types of neurobiological data
that are collected from monkeys who experience the same
stimulus conditions.
Given such detailed correspondences with experienced qualia and multiple types of data, it can be argued
that these dynamical resonant states are not just “neural
correlates of consciousness” that various authors have
also discussed, notably David Chalmers and Christof
Koch and their colleagues. Rather, they are mechanistic
representations of the qualia that embody individual conscious experiences on the psychological level. If such a
correspondence between detailed brain representations
and detailed properties of conscious qualia occurs for a
sufficiently large body of psychological data, then it would
provide strong evidence that these brain representations
create and support these conscious experiences. A theory
of this kind would have provided a linking hypothesis
between brain dynamics and the conscious mind. Such
a linking hypothesis between brain and mind must be
demonstrated before one can claim to have a “theory of
consciousness”.
If, despite such a linking hypothesis, a philosopher
or scientist claims that, unless one can “see red” or “feel
fear” in a theory of the Hard Problem, then it does not
contribute to solving that problem, then no scienti#c
theory can ever hope to solve the Hard Problem. This is
true because science as we know it cannot do more than

Overview

to provide a mechanistic theoretical description of the
dynamical events that occur when individual conscious
qualia are experienced. However, as such a principled,
albeit incrementally developing, theory of consciousness
becomes available, including increasingly detailed psychological, neurobiological, and even biochemical processes
in its explanations, it can dramatically shi! the focus of
discussions about consciousness, just as relativity theory
transformed discussions of space and time, and quantum
theory of how matter works. As in quantum theory, there
are measurement limitations in understanding our brains.
We can no more personally ride an electron than we can
enter a neuron that is participating in a conscious experience. Such an empathic limitation has not deterred physicists from believing that they have acquired an effective
understanding of the physical world, based on their ability
to explain and predict enough facts about it. This book subscribes to the view that it will not deter psychologists and
neurobiologists from believing that they have acquired an
effective understanding of the Hard Problem, based on our
own explanatory and predictive successes.
Before explaining in subsequent chapters how ART
can clarify the brain substrates of conscious experiences,
it is useful to emphasize that ART was not developed to
explain consciousness. Rather, it was developed to explain
and predict large psychological and neurobiological databases about learning, perception, cognition, and emotion
that clarify how our brains solve the stability-plasticity
dilemma. These explanations led ART to specify mechanistic links between brain processes of learning, expectation, attention, resonance, and synchrony to explain
psychological data about seeing, hearing, feeling, and
knowing. As these discoveries were made, it became clear
that the resonances hereby discovered also exhibit parametrical properties of individual conscious experiences,
as embodied within the spatio-temporal patterning of cell
activities across networks of feature detectors. Indeed, my
early mathematical results from the 1960s and 1970s about
the brain’s functional units of short-term memory (STM)
and long-term memory (LTM) proved that the functional
units of both STM and LTM are distributed patterns across
networks of feature-selective cells. See Chapter 2 for these
laws. Later results showed how these distributed patterns
form part of synchronous resonant states that focus attention upon the critical features that represent predictive
neural information, including those feature patterns that
embody the parametric properties of individual conscious
experiences. Such discoveries, repeated multiple times
over a period of decades, led to a growing understanding
of how Consciousness interacts with processes of Learning,
Expectation, Attention, Resonance, and Synchrony. ART
was hereby led to predict that all brain representations
that solve the stability-plasticity dilemma use variations of
CLEARS mechanisms.

|

45

These discoveries were o!en made in multiple separate modeling projects. Synthesizing all of these projects
is needed to explain the current understanding of how
ART can help to solve the Hard Problem. This synthesis
is called the conscious ART, or cART, model when focusing on explaining data about consciousness. Even if
one’s personal de#nition of the Hard Problem excludes
any scienti#c theory, or if one is not interested in the
Hard Problem, one can bene#t from how the current
cART theory explains the functional meaning of many
different kinds of psychological and neurobiological
data, both normal and clinical, that no other theory
has yet explained, and makes predictions to further test
these explanations.

Some facts that support
CLEARS predictions
The processes that are summarized by the CLEARS
mnemonic are related to one another in speci#c ways
that subsequent psychological and neurobiological data
have supported. For example, attention must o!en be
focused on the cues to be learned during visual perceptual learning, as scientists like Merav Ahissar and Shaul
Hochstein (Ahissar and Hochstein, 1998), Minami Ito,
Gerald Westheimer, and Charles Gilbert (Ito, Westheimer,
and Gilbert, 1998), and Zhong-Lin Lu and Barbara Dosher
(Lu and Dosher, 2004) have shown. The same is true
during auditory learning, as Enquan Gao and Nobuo Suga
(Gao and Suga, 1998) have shown, and during somatosensory learning, as David Krupa, Asif Ghazanfar, and
Miguel Nicolelis (Krupa, Ghazanfar, and Nicolelis, 1999)
and Jayson Parker and Jonathan Dostrovsky (Parker and
Dostrovsky, 1999) have shown.
However, there are also situations where perceptual
learning can occur without focused attention or conscious awareness, as Takeo Watanabe, José Náñez, and
Yuka Sasaki have shown in a series of remarkable experiments (e.g., Watanabe, Náñez, and Sasaki, 2001). I explain
the Watanabe et al. data in Chapter 10 a!er describing
a laminar cortical extension of ART that I have called
LAMINART.
ART’s predicted links between attention and synchronous oscillations have been experimentally supported by experiments reported by Timothy Buschman
and Earl Miller (Buschman and Miller, 2007), Andreas
Engel, Pascal Fries, and Wolf Singer (Engel, Fries, and
Singer, 2001), Georgia Gregoriou, Stephen Gotts, Huihui
Zhou, and Robert Desimone (Gregorious, Gotts, Zhou,
and Desimone, 2009), Gregoriou and Desimone with
Andrew Rossi and Leslie Ungerleider (Gregoriou, Rossi,

46

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Ungerleider, and Desimone, 2014), and Daniel Pollen
(Pollen, 1999).
Of particular interest are data supporting ART’s predicted link between synchronous oscillations and consciousness that neuroscientists such as Victor Lamme
(Lamme, 2006), Rudolfo Llinas (Llinas, Ribary, Contreras,
and Pedroarena, 1998), and Wolf Singer (Singer, 1998) and
their colleagues have reported.
In my discussions throughout the book, links between
attention and consciousness will play an important role,
and include several functionally different kinds of attention, such as prototype attention during recognition
learning, and boundary attention and surface attention
during visual perception. Some authors have nonetheless argued that visual attention and consciousness can
be dissociated. For example, in 2007, Christof Koch and
Naotsugu Tsuchiya (Koch and Tsuchiva, 2007) noted
that “subjects can attend to a location for many seconds
and yet fail to see one or more attributes of an object at
that location . . . In lateral masking (visual crowding), the
orientation of a peripherally-presented grating is hidden
from conscious sight but remains sufficiently potent to
induce an orientation-dependent a!ereffect . . . ” In fact,
the data that Koch and Tsuchiya describe can be explained
by how ART links attention and consciousness, notably
by using properties of a surface-shroud resonance (Table
1.4). Properties of conscious visual crowding experiences
follow immediately from properties of the surface-shroud
resonances that are formed in response to visual crowding
stimuli, for reasons that I will explain in Chapter 6.
Since I introduced ART in 1976, it has undergone continual development to explain and predict increasingly
large psychological and neurobiological databases. Let
me list some of them now so that you can realize that I
am not talking about a future promissory note. Rather, I
would argue that we are in the midst of an ongoing scienti#c revolution. ART has helped to explain data ranging from normal and abnormal aspects of human and
animal perception and cognition, to the spiking and oscillatory dynamics of hierarchically-organized laminar
thalamo-cortical and cortico-cortical networks in multiple modalities.
Indeed, some ART models individually explain, simulate, and predict psychological, anatomical, neurophysiological, biophysical, and even biochemical data. ART currently provides functional and mechanistic explanations
of data concerning such diverse topics as laminar cortical
circuitry; invariant object and scenic gist learning and
recognition; prototype, surface, and boundary attention;
gamma and beta oscillations; learning of entorhinal grid
cells and hippocampal place cells; computation of homologous spatial and temporal mechanisms in the entorhinalhippocampal system; vigilance breakdowns during
autism, medial temporal amnesia, and Alzheimer’s disease; cognitive-emotional interactions that focus attention

on valued objects in an adaptively timed way; Item-OrderRank working memories and learned list chunks for the
planning and control of sequences of linguistic, spatial,
and motor information; conscious speech percepts that are
influenced by future context; auditory streaming in noise
during source segregation; and speaker normalization.
Brain regions whose functions are clari#ed by ART include visual and auditory neocortex; speci#c and nonspeci#c thalamic nuclei; inferotemporal, parietal, prefrontal,
entorhinal, hippocampal, parahippocampal, perirhinal,
and motor cortices; frontal eye #elds; supplementary eye
#elds; amygdala; basal ganglia: cerebellum; and superior
colliculus. These uni#ed explanations of many different
types of data increased con#dence in the emerging classi#cation of resonances.
The book #rst describes resonances (Table 1.3) that
support visual seeing, knowing, and reaching (Chapters
5-11); then auditory hearing, knowing, and speaking
(Chapter 12); and #nally emotional feeling, knowing, and
acting (Chapter 13), while also proposing how these various kinds of resonances may interact together.

Equations, modules, and
modal architectures
Before describing how these resonances work, it is helpful
to review the kind of mind-brain theory that enables links
between brain mechanisms and psychological functions to
be established, and how similar organizational principles
and mechanisms, suitably specialized, can support conscious qualia across modalities. This discussion highlights
from the viewpoint of consciousness some of the concepts
that have been introduced earlier in this chapter.
One reason for this inter-modality unity is that a
small number of equations suffice to model all modalities, whether visual, auditory, emotional, or cognitive.
These include equations for short-term memory, or STM;
medium-term memory, or MTM; and long-term memory,
or LTM, that I #rst published in 1967-8.
These equations are used to de#ne a somewhat larger
number of modules, or microcircuits, that can carry out
different functions within each modality. These modules
include shunting on-center off-surround networks, gated
dipole opponent processing networks, associative learning
networks, spectral adaptively timed learning networks,
and the like. Each of these types of modules exhibits a rich,
but not universal, set of useful computational properties
that I will describe as we go along. For example, shunting
on-center off-surround networks can carry out properties
like contrast normalization, including discounting the illuminant; contrast enhancement, noise suppression, and
winner-take-all choice; short-term memory and working

Overview

memory storage; attentive matching of bottom-up input
patterns and top-down learned expectations; and synchronous oscillations and traveling waves.
These equations and modules are specialized and assembled into modal architectures, where “modal” stands
for different modalities of biological intelligence, including
architectures for vision, audition, cognition, cognitiveemotional interactions, and sensory-motor control. An
integrated self is possible because it builds, across all modalities, on a shared set of equations and modules within
modal architectures that can interact seamlessly together.
In particular, modal architectures are general-purpose, in
that they can process any kind of inputs to that modality,
whether from the external world or from other modal
architectures. They are also self-organizing, in that they
can autonomously develop and learn in response to these
inputs. Modal architectures are thus less general than the
von Neumann architecture that provides the mathematical foundation of modern computers, but much more general than a traditional AI algorithm. ART networks form
part of several different modal architectures, including
modal architectures that enable seeing, hearing, feeling,
and knowing. Without these unifying mechanistic ingredients, evolution could not have progressed to give us the
wonders of our daily conscious experiences.
Some other approaches to understanding consciousness.
Before moving on to more thoroughly explain how ART,
and various other neural models, explains data about our
conscious and unconscious experiences, it is useful to put
these explanations into the context of other approaches to
understanding consciousness.
The #eld of consciousness studies has exploded since
the seminal article of Francis Crick and Christof Koch was
published in 1990 (Crick and Koch, 1990), and boasts its
own journals and conferences. Crick was already world
famous for receiving the Nobel Prize with James Watson
in 1953 for their contributions to understanding the
double helix shape of the DNA molecule. He then became
interested in how brains work, as did several other Nobel
Laureates, notably Gerald Edelman, a!er they won their
Nobel Prizes for work in other #elds. Edelman won his
Prize, which was shared with Rodney Porter, for their discoveries concerning the chemical structure of antibodies.
They all realized that understanding mind and brain was
the next great frontier in science.
In their 1990 article, Crick and Koch, described two
forms of consciousness “a very fast form, linked to iconic
memory . . . ; and a slower one [wherein] an attentional
mechanism transiently binds together all those neurons
whose activity relates to the relevant features of a single
visual object”. This conclusion was consistent with available
results about ART at that time, but did not offer a linking
hypothesis between brain dynamics and the perceptual,
cognitive, and cognitive-emotional representations whose

|

47

resonances support different conscious qualia. A great deal
of additional experimental evidence for neural correlates
of consciousness has been reported since 1990, but has
typically led to theoretical conclusions that fail to make
the crucial linking hypothesis between speci#c dynamical
brain representations and speci#c conscious psychological
qualia (e.g., Baars, 2005; Dehaene, 2014; Dennett, 1991;
Edelman and Tononi, 2000; Koch et al., 2016; Tononi,
2004, 2015).
For example, the neural global workspace model that
was published in 2014 by Stanislas Dehaene (Dehaene,
2014) builds upon the global workspace of Bernard Baars
(Baars, 2005) and claims that “consciousness is global
information broadcasting within the cortex [to achieve]
massive sharing of pertinent information throughout
the brain” (p. 13). Dehaene also makes a number of other
useful observations, including that “the time that our conscious vision spends entertaining an interpretation is directly related to its likelihood, given the sensory evidence
received” (p. 97) and that “the conditioning paradigm
suggests that consciousness has a speci#c evolutionary
role: learning over time, rather than simply living in the
instant. The system formed by the prefrontal cortex and
its interconnected areas, including the hippocampus, may
serve the essential role of bridging temporal gaps” (p. 103).
Such claims are consistent with the analyses in this book,
but they do not describe the underlying organizational
principles, neural mechanisms, or brain representations
that embody subjective conscious aspects of experience.
In particular, the claim about “global information
broadcasting” is consistent with analyses of how adaptive
resonances—such as surface-shroud resonances for consciously seeing objects and events, and feature-category
resonances for recognizing them—may synchronize the
dynamics of multiple brain regions, but does not provide
insights into the contents of conscious experiences, or the
different kinds of resonances that support them, as summarized by Table 1.4. The observation that links conscious
vision to likelihood is clari#ed by properties of the shunting competitive networks (Chapter 2) wherein winning
conscious resonances are chosen, whether at the level of
surface-shroud or stream-shroud resonances for representing individual percepts (Chapters 6 and 12) or of higherorder decisions about the most predictive list categories
in a Masking Field (Chapter 12) for representing the most
likely interpretation of a recent sequences of events, and
the best prediction for what will happen next. Moreover,
the comment about the role of hippocampal-prefrontal
interactions during conditioning does not provide insight
into how or why adaptively timed learning occurs, notably
the distinction between expected and unexpected discon#rmations during terrestrial exploration and learning, or
the functional role, or neural mechanisms, that cause the
famous Weber law property that is evident in data about
adaptively timed learning (Chapter 14).

48

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Gerald Edelman also got interested in consciousness and published a book in 2008 with Giulio Tononi
with the arresting title A Universe of Consciousness: How
Matter Becomes Imagination (Edelman and Tononi, 2000).
Continuing in the spirit of this work, Tononi published
an article in 2004 entitled “An Information Integration
Theory of Consciousness” (Tononi, 2004). In this article,
he de#ned a scalar function ), “the quantity of consciousness available to a system . . . as the value of a complex of
elements. ) is the amount of causally effective information
that can be integrated across the informational weakest
link of a subset of elements . . . ” In 2012 and 2015, Tononi
further develop postulates for his Integrated Information
Theory (IIT) for physical systems that include consciousness (Tononi, 2012, 2015). These postulates are intrinsic
existence, compositionality, information, integration, and
exclusion. These postulates summarize some basic facts
about consciousness, but do not explain them.
For example, the integration postulate claims that
each experience is uni#ed and cannot be reduced to independent components, much as an adaptive resonance is
a bound state that develops when resonance emerges due
to reciprocal bottom-up and top-down signals (Chapter
5). The exclusion postulate claims that every experience
is limited to particular things and not others, and has its
own spatio-temporal grain, much as a resonance develops
through time, focuses attention on some feature combinations while inhibiting others (Chapter 5), and may be
adaptively timed by what I call spectral timing circuits
(Chapter 14). The information postulate claims that selective past causes and selective future effects are represented,
much as a cognitive-emotional resonance can discover
which combinations of features are predictive and which
are accidental and attentionally blocked (Chapter 13). And
so on. Although these postulates tangentially touch upon
some of the themes that the current book discusses, they
have not demonstrated an ability to explain or predict
signi#cant psychological or neurobiological databases.
The current book provides ample evidence that no scalarvalued function can explain the brain principles, neural
mechanisms, and dynamical events that give rise to speci#c conscious experiences.
Both Dehaene and Tononi used the word “information”
as a critical component of their hypotheses. But what is
“information”? The scienti#c concept of “information” in
the mathematical sense of Information Theory was de#ned
and mathematically characterized in 1948 by the great
American mathematician, electrical engineer, and cryptographer, Claude Shannon (Shannon, 1948). Shannon’s
remarkable contributions also include his founding of the
#eld of digital circuit design theory in 1937 as part of his
Master’s Degree at MIT when he was just 21 years old!
In order to even discuss what “information” is requires that a set of states exist whose “information”
can be computed, and that #xed probabilities exist for

transitions between these states. In contrast, the brain is a
self-organizing system that continually creates new states
through development and learning, and whose probability structure is continually changing along with them.
Without a theory that explains how these states arise, and
how their transition probabilities may change through
time in response to changing environmental statistics, the
classical concept of information is useless. How such states
arise is a key explanatory target of ART, and is one reason
why ART can offer a classi#cation of the resonances that
are proposed to embody speci#c conscious experiences.
The influential philosopher of mind, Daniel Dennett,
wrote a highly cited book in 1991 with the arresting title
Consciousness Explained (Dennett, 1991). In this book,
Dennett argued against a Cartesian Theater model; that
is, a place in the brain where “it all comes together” and
generates subjective judgments. Instead, Dennett advocated a Multiple Dra!s model where discriminations are
distributed in space and time across the brain, a concept
that, without further elaboration, is too vague to have
explanatory power.
To the extent that Dennett supported his claim with a
discussion of visual percepts, he made some mistakes. For
example, when discussing surface #lling-in, he claimed:
“The fundamental flaw in the idea of ‘#lling-in’ is that it
suggests that the brain is providing something when in
fact the brain is ignoring something” (p. 356). “The brain
doesn’t have to ‘#ll in’ for the blind spot(.(.(.(We don’t notice
these gaps, but they don’t have to be #lled in because we’re
designed not to notice them” (p. 355). In other words,
Dennett argued that a physical process of #lling-in does
not occur. Given that Dennett put an example of neon
color spreading on the back cover of his book, he clearly
viewed this claim as an important part of his proposals
about consciousness. I will summarize in Chapter 4, a!er
describing neon color spreading and how it works, why
Dennett’s remarks are not supported by the data.
Various other authors have made interesting comments about consciousness based upon properties of perceptual and neurobiological data. Notable among them
are the excellent Dutch experimental neuroscientist,
Victor Lamme, and his colleagues (e.g., Keizer, Hommel,
and Lamme, 2015; Tsuchiya, Wilke, Frassle, and Lamme,
2016). However, these contributions have not proposed organizational principles or brain mechanisms whereby to
understand the brain dynamics of individual conscious
experiences, including how they may share similar principles of resonant dynamics, yet also occur in different brain
regions where they embody solutions to environmental
constraints that differentiate seeing, hearing, feeling, and
knowing.
Perhaps the theory of the highly influential PortugueseAmerican neuroscientist and author, Antonio Damasio
comes closest to theoretically linking brain to mind in his
beautifully written 1999 book with the title The Feeling

Overview

of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of
Consciousness (Damasio, 1999). As I will explain in
Chapter 13, Damasio used the clinical data that he elegantly summarized in his book to guide him to what is, in
effect, a heuristic derivation of the Cognitive-EmotionalMotor, or CogEM, model that I had #rst published in
1971. I further developed CogEM with several PhD students and postdoctoral fellows over the years to explain
and predict a huge amount of interdisciplinary data about
cognitive-emotional interactions. Unlike CogEM and its
re#nements, Damasio’s theory provides no mechanistic

|

49

account, and could therefore provide no data simulations
or predictions based upon the model’s emergent properties. Nor could he situate his heuristic concepts within a
larger theory of how brain resonances and consciousness
may be linked.
These various alternative efforts to explaining consciousness dramatize that, without a principled theory
that can mechanistically link brain mechanisms to mental
functions, even the most ingenious heuristic insights ultimately hit a brick wall and cannot be further developed
into a truly predictive theory of how our brains work.

