3
How a Brain Sees:
Constructing Reality
Visual reality as illusions that explain
how we see art
Why do we bother to see?
Seeing provides us with one of our most vital sources of information about the external
world. A large fraction of our brains—o!en half or more of the entire brain in some
primates—is devoted to processing visual information. In addition to its crucial role in
our daily lives, our visual intelligence permeates all of our mathematics, science, and
technology. As just one example, vision, along with the eye, arm, and limb movements
that we make when we manipulate and navigate the world, provides the intuitive foundation for inventing the geometrical concepts and axioms with which we describe the
world. Every field of quantitative science is founded on geometrical ideas, partly because
they provide tools for scientific measurement, and partly because they provide a language with which to describe scientific concepts. Indeed, one of the greatest revolutions
in physics in the 20th century required a revision of our concepts about the correct type
of geometry with which to describe the Universe. At that time, Einstein expressed the
equations of his General Relativity Theory using a Riemannian, or curved, geometrical
representation of space-time.
Understanding of the processes whereby vision governs geometrical thinking has
lagged far behind our use of this faculty. This lag has been due to the sheer difficulty of
the problem, not to any lack of data. A major breakthrough in this problem area should
have implications wherever the human use of geometrical ideas has influenced mathematical, scientific, and technological thinking.
Progress during the past thirty years concerning the brain processes that govern
visual perception has led to a host of new ideas. These ideas have clarified that the classical axioms of geometry do not accurately describe the brain processes whereby we
see and act upon the world, even though these brain processes enable us to make the
physical measurements in the world that mathematical and computational concepts
have codified. It remains to fully explain how these brain processes generate and represent these mathematical and computational concepts, a step that would go a long way

86

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN. Stephen Grossberg, Oxford University Press. © Oxford University Press 2021.
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780190070557.003.0003

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

towards explaining away Einstein’s observation that “the
most incomprehensible thing about the universe is that it
is comprehensible”. The emerging theory that I review in
this book provides a foundation for beginning this task.
In order to explain and predict psychological and neurobiological data about vision, this theory has introduced
new types of nonlinear dynamical systems, new concepts
in geometry, new ideas about statistical decision theory,
new examples of phase transitions, new uncertainty principles for physical measurements, and new parallel architectures for computer vision machines. Despite this progress, a great deal more work remains to be done to fill in the
gaps in current theoretical and experimental knowledge.
Figure 0.1 summarizes the anatomical stages of visual
processing and their main connections. Figure 3.1 summarizes various visual functions that are embodied within
these stages, based upon several decades of modeling and
over one hundred years of experiments.
To start my discussion of vision, let me first consider the
classical distinction between seeing and knowing, which

|

87

many authors have heatedly debated throughout the last
century, including Helmholtz and Kanizsa. I would first
like to describe some of the reasons why this issue has been
so hotly debated, and how this debate may be resolved.
The distinction between seeing and knowing can be
restated as one between seeing and recognizing. The images
in Figure 1.1 illustrate what I mean. The image in the le!
panel consists of a series of concentric blue lines that face
the same central point on the paper. Our percept of the
figure is one in which we both see and recognize a circle
that abuts the ends of the blue lines. We see this circle because it separates the brighter white disk within the circle
from the darker background that lies outside it. This circle
is a visual illusion, since neither the circle nor the bright
disk within it are part of the picture itself. It is called the
Ehrenstein illusion in honor of the German perceptual scientist, Walter Ehrenstein, who described it. Images such as
these raise the following types of questions:
• Why are there so many visual illusions?

FIGURE 3.1. A macrocircuit of key visual processes (in green) and the cortical areas in which they primarily occur (in red), from the retina
to the prefrontal cortex (PFC), including both the What and Where cortical streams. The bottom-up, horizontal, and top- down interactions
help each of these processes to overcome computationally complementary processing de!ciencies that they would experience without them, and also to read- out top- down expectations that help to stabilize learning while they focus attention on salient objects and
positions.

88

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

• How does illusion differ from reality?
• Why do not illusory percepts undermine successful
adaptation to the “real” world?
I will show how illusions provide vital clues about how the
brain successfully adapts to the real world, and that many
percepts and other experiences that we believe to be real are,
in actuality, mentally constructed illusions that just happen
to match the structure of the world very well. How this happens clarifies why the debate about the difference between
illusion and reality has gone on for so long, why many cultures have emphasized mystical states of mind that exploit
the constructive properties of the mind, and why the classical proposal of Artificial Intelligence that the brain can be
modeled by a non-Neumann computer is wrong.

Consciousness without
qualia: Why do we bother
to see?
The offset grating image in the right panel of Figure 1.1
provides a simple example of a percept that can be recognized but not seen. When you look at this image, you
recognize a vertical boundary that abuts the ends of the
horizontal blue lines in the grating. You can easily recognize that such a vertical boundary is there, but you cannot
easily see it. By this I mean that the salience of the vertical boundary is far greater than any small differences in
brightness or color that you may manage to perceive due
to momentary shi!s in your focus of attention. The vertical boundary is thus a percept that you can recognize but
cannot see. You know that it is there, and you are conscious
of knowing this, but it is invisible.
Such percepts are said to be “amodal” in the perceptual literature, to distinguish them from “modal” percepts
that do carry visible signs of brightness, color, or other
“qualia”. This use of the term amodal generalizes the more
traditional use by authors such as Albert Michotte, Gabio
Metelli, and Gaetano Kanizsa (e.g., Kanizsa, 1976) because
the mechanistic analysis of how boundaries and surfaces
interact, that will be summarized below, supports a more
general terminology in which perceptual boundaries are
formed without any corresponding visible surface qualia.
Before going further, it’s important to clearly understand what the word “qualia” means, or at least the sense
that I will use it in this book. The following summary from
the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy nicely summarizes this meaning:
“Feelings and experiences vary widely. For example,
I run my fingers over sandpaper, smell a skunk, feel a
sharp pain in my finger, seem to see bright purple, become

extremely angry. In each of these cases, I am the subject of a mental state with a very distinctive subjective
character. There is something it is like for me to undergo
each state, some phenomenology that it has. Philosophers
o!en use the term ‘qualia’ (singular ‘quale’) to refer to
the introspectively accessible, phenomenal aspects of our
mental lives.” (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qualia/)
The fact that we can consciously recognize percepts
that have no qualia does not support opinions of distinguished philosophers like John Searle who wrote
an article in 1998 about “How to Study Consciousness
Scientifically” asserting that “The problem of consciousness is identical with the problem of qualia . . . That is why
I seldom use the word ‘qualia’, except in sneer quotes,
because it suggests that there is something else to consciousness besides qualia, and there is not” (Searle, 1998).
One way out of this problem is to define qualia to be essentially equivalent with every conscious experience. The
rest of the book avoids such a convention when using
words like seeing, hearing, feeling, and knowing, by
writing clearly about the phenomena that are included in
these descriptions.
Our percepts of simple images like the offset grating
challenge familiar views about the function of seeing. For
example, one intuitively appealing answer to the question:
“Why do we see?” is that “We see things in order to recognize them.” But we can recognize the vertical boundary of
an offset grating without seeing it. This example contradicts the idea that seeing is necessary for recognizing. But
if we do not always need to see things in order to recognize
them, then why do we bother to see at all?
As I noted in the discussion of Table 1.3, conscious
experiences like seeing, hearing, and feeling embody
brain representations that can control effective actions
of one sort or the other, whether they are reaching,
speaking, or acting in other ways. I will further develop
the evidence for this perspective in Chapters 3, 4, 6, and
11. You might at this point want to complain that the
offset grating is pretty flimsy evidence on which to base
such grand conclusions. Even the fact that the offset
grating is “just” a visual illusion may give you pause. The
next section suggests that the offset grating is actually
illustrative of a large number of experiences whereby we
perceive the “real” world.

All boundaries are invisible:
From Kanizsa squares to
figure-ground separation
The vertical percept in the offset grating shows us that
“some boundaries are invisible”. Now I would like to show

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

you a sense in which “all boundaries are invisible”, at least
within the brain system that forms such boundaries. Along
the way, I will need to tell you what perceptual boundaries
are, how the brain computes them, and why this is not just
a crazy idea.
To get started, consider Figure 3.2. This type of image
was yet another example that Kanizsa introduced to argue
against Helmholtz’s position that all seeing is based on a
type of knowledge-based hypothesis testing. I earlier discussed how the stratification images in Figure 1.4 were also
used for this purpose. In Figure 3.2, Kanizsa noted that
our experiences with a regular black-and-white checkerboard should lead us to expect that a white square is occluded by the gray disk in the lower le! of the image, and
a black square is occluded by the gray disk in the upper
right of the image. Instead, there is a strong percept of an
amodally completed black cross behind the gray disk in
the lower le!, and of a white cross behind the gray disk in
the upper right.
I will use Figure 3.2 to call your attention to a different
issue. Let your eye wander along the circular boundary
of the lower-le! gray disk. At successive moments, the
boundary may abut a white square, then a black one, then
another white one, and so on. Where the square is white,
the contrast between the white background and the gray
disk goes from white to gray; that is, from a lighter to a
darker shade of gray. Where the square is black, the contrast goes from black to gray, or from a darker to a lighter
shade of gray. As your eye traverses the entire circular
boundary, the contrast keeps flipping between light-todark and dark-to-light. Despite these contrast reversals,
we perceive a single continuous boundary surrounding the
gray disk. It is not broken into two sets of four boundary

FIGURE 3.2. What do you think lies under the two gray disks?

|

89

fragments, depending whether the direction-of-contrast
goes from light-to-dark or from dark-to-light.
These fragmented boundaries would have been created
if all that happened in perceiving the circular boundary
was for cells that are sensitive to a light-to-dark contrast,
or to a dark-to-light contrast, but not both, responded
along the circle. Instead, the fact that we perceive a single
continuous circular boundary that includes both contrast
polarities illustrates that the brain pools, or adds, signals
from cells that are sensitive to both of these contrast polarities, at every position, in order to detect the entire boundaries of objects, irrespective of the direction-of-contrast
at different boundary positions. The same thing may be
said about the checkerboard background of the image: We
can recognize long vertical boundaries from the top to the
bottom of the image, even though these boundaries are
formed from alternating contrast polarities. The long horizontal boundaries of the checkerboard are also recognized
in the same way.
The punch line is: If the brain adds together signals
from opposite contrast polarities in order to build boundaries around objects, then these boundaries cannot tell the
difference between light and dark, and thus cannot carry
a visible signal of lightness or darkness. In other words, all
boundaries are invisible! And they are invisible for a basic
reason: The brain needs to build boundaries around objects that lie in front of textured backgrounds whose relative contrast with respect to the object can reverse as the
boundary is traversed.
Perhaps the simplest example of this boundarypooling property of the brain can be perceived by
viewing the images in Figure 3.3. The image in Figure
3.3a is another famous image due to Kanizsa. This image
consists of four black pac-man, or pie-shaped, figures on
white paper. The percept of the square that abuts the pacmen is a visual illusion that is called the Kanizsa square.
The enhanced brightness of the square is also an illusion.
The percept derived from Figure 3.3c shows that these
boundaries can be induced by either collinear edges or
perpendicular line ends, and that both kinds of inducers
cooperate to generate an even stronger boundary. These
inducers need to lie along the positions of the illusory
contour in order to cooperate. Figure 3.3d shows that,
if the perpendicular lines cross the positions of the illusory contours, then they can inhibit the strength of these
contours.
Now consider the image in Figure 3.3b. The percept
that it elicits is called a “reverse-contrast Kanizsa square”.
Again a square boundary can be recognized. However, if
the contrast of the gray background relative to the white
and black pac-men is chosen correctly, then you will not
see a gray square that is brighter or darker than its gray
background. Both the interior of the square and the background around the square will o!en both appear to have
the same shade of gray.

90
(a)

(c)

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN
(b)

(d)

FIGURE 3.3. Kanizsa square and reverse-contrast Kanizsa
square percepts. The spatial arrangement of pac-men, lines,
and relative contrasts determines the perceived brightnesses
of the squares, and even if they exhibit no brightness difference
from their backgrounds, as in (b). These factors also determine
whether pac-men will appear to be amodally completed behind
the squares, and how far behind them.

In this percept, the two vertical boundaries of the
square are formed between pac-man edges of opposite
contrast polarity: white-to-gray (light-to-dark) below, and
black-to-white (dark-to-light) above. To form these vertical boundaries, the brain pools signals from opposite
directions-of-contrast to complete an object boundary,
albeit the boundary of an illusory object that receives no
bottom-up contrastive signals between the aligned pacmen. In addition, the two horizontal boundaries of the
square are formed between like directions-of-contrast.
Significantly, both sets of boundaries can join together to
form the square. Thus both like-contrast and oppositecontrast polarities are pooled together to form an object’s
boundary, thereby illustrating once again why all boundaries are invisible. Another way to say this property is that
boundaries are insensitive to contrast polarity, in the sense
that they pool signals from cells that are sensitive to opposite contrast polarities.
The Kanizsa square images in Figure 3.3 generate percepts that illustrate other important visual processes as
well. Each figure generates a percept of an emergent square
that occludes part of four circular disks, whose unoccluded portions are the visible pac-men. In particular, each
of these 2D images creates a 3D percept of a square figure
separated in depth from its background. These figureground percepts confront us with the same fundamental
questions that were also raised by the Kanizsa stratification images in Figure 1.4: How are the disks completed
behind the squares? And why are the occluded pie-shaped
regions invisible?

Brighter objects look
closer: Proximity-contrast
covariance
An even more remarkable combination of properties can
be seen by comparing the percepts generated by the two
figures in the le! column of Figure 3.3. When viewed
under controlled conditions, the Kanizsa square percept
that is induced by Figure 3.3c looks brighter than the
Kanizsa square percept that is induced by Figure 3.3a.
This enhanced brightness is due to the extra four lines in
Figure 3.3c that cooperate with the pac-men to induce the
Kanizsa square percept. The brighter Kanizsa square also
looks even closer than its background does in Figure 3.3a.
Why do brighter objects o!en look closer?
Variants of this kind of observation has been made by
many vision scientists, going back at least to a paper of M.
L. Ashley in 1898 (Ashley, 1898), and also include Kanizsa
(Kanizsa, 1974, 1976), Hiroyuki Egusa (Egusa, 1983),
Drake Bradley and Susan Dumais (Bradley and Dumais,
1984), Barbara Dosher, George Sperling, and Stephen
Wurst (Dosher, Sperling, and Wurst, 1986), and Franco
Purghé and Stanley Coren (Purghé and Coren, 1992), over
the years. This interaction between brightness and depth
is yet another example of the fact that visual properties are
not processed by independent modules, but rather as complementary boundary and surface streams many of whose
visual qualities interact, as in Figures 3.1 and 1.21. Why
brighter Kanizsa squares look closer will be explained in
Chapter 4. See particularly Figure 4.53.
The phrase proximity-luminance covariance is sometimes used for examples where increasing the luminance
of one part of an image makes it look closer. In particular,
Dosher, Sperling, and Wurst used this phrase in an excellent article about this topic in 1986 (Dosher, Sperling,
and Wurst, 1986). I like to call the Kanizsa square percept
an example of proximity-contrast covariance instead, because the white luminance in the Kanizsa square image is
the same across the image. The brightness that makes the
Kanizsa square look closer is a property of the contrast of
the emergent square relative to its background.
Finally, in the percept generated by Figure 3.3d, although the four lines block the square boundaries in their
depth plane, the Kanizsa square sides can be completed
behind them, even while the inner ends of the lines cooperate to induce a percept of a circular Ehrenstein disk
(Figure 1.1) in front of them. This figure hereby generates
a percept with three depth planes! How all these percepts
arise will be explained later in the next chapter.
You may by now be wondering, if all boundaries are really invisible, then how do we see the Kanizsa
squares in Figure 3.3a? How, indeed, do we see anything?!
Something else must also be going on that lets us see the

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

visible world of surface brightnesses and colors. In 1984,
in addition to predicting that “all boundaries are invisible”, I also predicted that “all conscious visual qualia are
surface percepts” (Grossberg, 1984a). What is this additional surface perception process and how is it related to
the process whereby the brain forms boundaries? I will
now build up an answer to these basic questions in several
simple stages.

Living with your blind spot

|

91

in front of the retinal positions where all the axons come
together to be bundled into the optic nerve.
The blind spot is large! It is at least as large as the fovea.
Despite this fact, many of us manage to go through life
without ever realizing that we have a large blind hole in
our retinas. We certainly do not see a roving hole in the
world as our eyes scan a scene. Why not? In addition to the
blind spot, Figure 3.4 shows that a lot of veins lie between
the source of light and the retina. These veins nourish the
eye. Why do we not see the veins either?
Figure 3.5 illustrates yet another sense in which retinal
processing is noisy. It shows a cross-sectional view through
the retina, which is a complex organ in its own right.
Light is processed by several layers of retinal cells before
the processed signals are collected in the optic nerve and
sent to the brain. If you look closely, however, you will see
that there is something strange about how the light goes
through the retinal layers. Indeed, light passes through

To get started, let me first point out that perceptual boundaries and surfaces are not just high-level constructs that
have to do with sophisticated processes like object recognition and cognition. Boundaries and surfaces play a role
in processing signals from the very earliest stage of visual
processing, the eye itself.
The image in the top row of Figure 3.4
shows a cross-sectional view through an
eye. Light streams in from the le!, passes
through the lens and vitreous humor,
and finally hits the photosensitive retina.
The most sensitive region of the retina is
called the fovea. The fovea is the region of
the retina with the highest acuity and the
highest concentration of color-sensitive
photoreceptors. The fovea processes a
region of visual space that is approximately one degree wide. Retinal acuity
gradually decreases with distance from
the fovea. Our eyes move in our heads to
direct our sensitive fovea to focus on new
points of interest.
Although the retina is a miracle of
biological design, it is also a very noisy
detector. Without the help of additional
processing by the brain, retinal noise
could easily defeat our ability to see. The
image at the bottom of Figure 3.4 illustrates two sources of noise on the surface
of the retina. To the le! of the figure, you
can see the fovea. To the right, you can see
the blind spot. The blind spot is a region
of the retina that is totally blind; it has no
light-sensitive photodetectors. The blind
spot exists because of the way in which the
photodetectors in other parts of the retina
send light-activated signals to the brain
along nerve pathways, called axons, that
are brought together in the optic nerve
(see again the upper image in Figure 3.4)
FIGURE 3.4. A cross-section of the eye, and top-down view of the retina, show how
which sends light-activated electrical sig- the blind spot and retinal veins can occlude the registration of light signals at their
nals to the brain. The blind spot lies right positions on the retina.

92

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 3.5. A cross-section of the retinal layers. Note that light stimuli need to go through all the retinal layers before they reach the
photoreceptor layer at which the light signals are registered.

all the retinal layers before it ever hits the photodetectors
and activates them! All these layers of cells can absorb and
scatter the light before it ever reaches the photodetectors.
This inversion of the retinal layers may make sense
from the viewpoint of how the retina develops, but it seems
very peculiar from the viewpoint of how the brain sees.
Richard Feynman, one of the most brilliant physicists of
the twentieth century, got very interested in how the brain
sees until he became aware of these facts. Feynman was a
famously honest man who realized that he could not think
of a sensible explanation for how the brain sees so well despite the retina’s peculiarities of having a blind spot as well
as retinal veins and retinal layers in front of the photoreceptors. Every scientist needs heuristics, or intuitive design
principles, on which to base a principled scientific theory.
These heuristics need to make sense, and in the best cases
are even parsimonious and beautiful, for a top theorist to
be comfortable with them. Feynman realized that he could
not find intuitively plausible principles for how the brain
copes with its noisy retinas, so he got out of vision. Of
course, a man with Feynman’s abundant intellectual and
personal resources could not be long deterred by this disappointment. He rapidly moved on to successfully pioneer
the fields of quantum computing and nanotechnology.
In the next few sections, I will suggest how seemingly
strange ideas such as “all boundaries are invisible” help to

explain how the brain compensates for the noisy design
of the retina. From a more general viewpoint, this discussion will illustrate how deficiencies of image processing at
one stage of brain organization—in this case, due to physical and developmental constraints on how the retina and
optic nerve grow, and how the retina gets nourished by
blood—are compensated by processing at higher stages
of brain organization. As I noted in Chapter 1, I call this
design principle hierarchical resolution of uncertainty. This
principle helps us to understand how the noisy and rapidly
metabolizing meat that makes up our eyes and brain cells
gives rise to the Platonic world of visual forms of which we
are consciously aware as we go through our lives.

Jiggling eyes and occluded
objects: Beware moving
dinosaurs!
How does the brain avoid seeing the retinal veins and the
blind spot? One contributing factor is that, even when we
think our eyes are fixated on a stationary object in the
world, they are rapidly jiggling in their orbits, back and
forth, by such a small amount that we are not consciously

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

aware of these tiny movements. This jiggle acts like a “refresh” operation that maintains the sensitivity of visual
nerve cells to the stationary object. It does so by creating
small relative motions between the object and the retina.
Many visual cells are sensitive to these motion transients
and fire in response to them. Images that do not move relative to the jiggling retina are said to be stabilized. Percepts
of stabilized images fade away. They cannot be seen a!er
a little while because they are not refreshed. The retinal
veins and blind spot are stabilized images because they
are attached to the retina. They therefore are not visible, at
least not under ordinary viewing conditions.
Those of you who saw the vastly entertaining movie
Jurassic Park will recall the frantic request that the humans
stop moving as the ravenous Tyrannosaurus Rex dinosaur
approached. This request was made because, presumably,
T Rex could not see stationary objects. Unfortunately, this
did not stop T Rex from moving, and it is relative motion
of its eyes relative to the world that would presumably have
stimulated its visually sensitive cells . . . ooops!
One way to check that you really do have retinal veins
is to hold a small flashlight to the side of your head, and
jiggle the light from the flashlight on your retina, preferably when you are in a dimly lit room. You will suddenly
see the moving shadows cast by the veins on your retina.
These shadows are quite large. Be glad, therefore, that the
veins are stabilized on your retinas!
The retinal jiggle helps to discount the veins and blind
spot, but more is needed to see the world of continuous
objects that we take for granted every day. To get a feel for
what is missing, imagine that a simple image, like one of
a thick straight edge, is registered by the retina in a region
that includes the blind spot and some retinal veins. Parts
of the edge cannot effectively activate retinal photoreceptors, because their visual signals are received where there
are veins or the blind spot. Because the veins and blind
spot are stabilized images on the retina, they fade. What
remains is not a representation of the entire edge, however,
but rather discontinuous fragments of the edge’s unoccluded regions (Figure 3.6, top image). How does the brain
transform these discontinuous fragments into a percept of
a continuous edge?

How illusions may represent
reality
We can now begin to better understand how the brain
can use the discontinuous fragments of an edge to complete a continuous edge percept. In Figure 3.6 (top image),
the occluded fragments of the edge are surrounded by
unoccluded fragments that are approximately collinear,
or aligned. The brain uses these collinear fragments to

|

93

FIGURE 3.6. Every line is an illusion because regions of the line
that are occluded by the blind spot or retinal veins are completed
at higher levels of brain processing by boundary completion and
surface !lling-in.

complete edge boundaries wherever they are missing. In
particular, the brain has cells that can form boundaries inwardly between pairs, or greater numbers, of collinear (or
nearly collinear) contrasts (Figure 3.6, second image from
top). In other words, a boundary can form in a region that
receives no visual inputs of its own if it has collinear inducers on both sides of the region. Then all the boundaries
that were occluded can be completed.
Using these ideas, we can begin to understand how
Kanizsa square percepts form in response to the images
in Figure 3.3. In particular, the brain does not known if
there is a retinal vein or blind spot between the pac-men in
Figure 3.3a. It will therefore complete boundaries between
pairs of such collinear contrasts whenever they are long
enough and not too far apart. If these boundary-forming
cells can also pool collinear signals from opposite contrast
polarities, as in the case of the reverse-contrast Kanizsa
square of Figure 3.3b, then they can complete the edge
even if the unoccluded edge fragments have opposite contrasts with respect to a textured background. The existence
of these variants of the Kanizsa square illusion is a small
price to pay for having percepts of the world that are not
occluded by the blind spot and retinal veins!
These examples illustrate why boundaries form inwardly between pairs, or greater numbers, of inducing
contrasts. It is fortunate that boundaries cannot form
outwardly from a single inducer. Imagine that they could.
Then any speck of contrast in an image or scene could
induce an expanding web of boundaries that could fill our
field of view. Such boundaries would do more to drive us
mad than to accurately represent objects in the world. It
is also clear from these examples that boundaries form

94

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

in an oriented way between collinear, or nearly collinear,
inducers, as in the case of the Kanizsa squares in Figure
3.3. Finally, we know from the example of the reversecontrast Kanizsa square in Figure 3.3b, and the Kanizsa
disk-on-texture display in Figure 3.2, that boundaries
are insensitive to contrast polarity. These three properties
of boundary completion are summarized in Figure 3.7
(bottom le!).
While emphasizing the inward completion of boundaries, I also want to mention that the process that forms
visible surfaces can propagates outward from individual
sources of brightness or color. For example, in Figure 3.6
(third image from top), the brightness and color of the
unoccluded parts of an edge—a!er the stabilized blind
spot and veins fade—flow outwards into the occluded
parts of the edge, thereby restoring brightness and color
to the edge percept at positions that were occluded by the
blind spot or retinal veins (Figure 3.6, bottom image).
This flow of brightness and color behaves much like a
fluid that diffuses away from a source. It is called surface
filling-in.

the contours of the boundary. By acting like barriers, or
obstructions, to the flow of brightness and color, boundaries can make themselves visible, by causing a different
brightness or color to occur on opposite sides of the
boundary. In the case of the Kanizsa square of Figure
3.3a, for example, the four black pac-men induce local
regions of enhanced brightness, called feature contours,
just inside the boundary. A computer simulation that I
published with my PhD student Alan Gove and Ennio
Mingolla in 1995 illustrates the percept that we see in response to the Kanizsa square, and how it arises (Gove,
Grossberg, and Mingolla, 1995). Figure 3.8B shows the
feature contours that are induced just inside the pacman boundaries. These feature contours fill-in within
the square boundary (Figure 3.8C) to create a percept of
enhanced brightness throughout the square surface, as
shown in Figure 3.8D.
A simulation of the percept that we see in response to
the reverse-contrast Kanizsa square was also published in
that article (Figure 3.9). In this simulation, whereas bright
feature contours are induced just inside the boundaries of
the two black pac-men at the bottom of the figure, dark
feature contours are induced just inside the boundaries
of the two white pac-men at the top of the figure (Figure
3.9B). Because these dark and bright feature contours are
approximately balanced, the filled-in surface color inside
the square is indistinguishable from the filled-in surface
color outside of the square (Figure 3.9D), so that the square
boundary is recognized, via the boundary representation
in Figure 3.9C, but not seen.
Boundaries act like a dam that contains the flow of
The model mechanisms that simulate the Kanizsa
brightness and color, and keeps it from flowing outside
square percepts in Figures 3.8 and 3.9 do not include the neural mechanisms of 3D vision that
lead to depthful figure-ground percepts, such
as those induced by the images in Figure 3.3.
Rather, these mechanisms show how the emergent boundaries and perceived brightnesses
of the square surfaces are created. How figureground percepts of Kanizsa squares and many
other images arise will be explained in Chapter
4, as I use the Method of Minimal Anatomies
between here and there to incrementally expand
and deepen the explanatory and predictive range
of our theoretical concepts.
To briefly summarize the lessons summarized in Figures 3.6, 3.8, and 3.9, with the occluded line in Figure 3.6 as a primary example:
Complementary Properties of Boundaries and Surfaces
A combination of inward boundary completion and outward filling-in of surface brightBoundary Completion
Surface Filling-in
ness and color help to complete the represenInward
Outward
tation of a line that is occluded by retinal veins
Oriented
Unoriented
or the blind spot. A remarkable implication of
Insensitive to direction-of-contrast
Sensitive to direction-of-contrast
this discussion is that: “Every line percept is an
illusion”.
FIGURE 3.7. The processes of boundary completion and surface !lling-in are

Boundaries contain filling-in
of feature contours within
surfaces

computationally complementary.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

FIGURE 3.8. Computer simulation of a Kanizsa square percept.
See the text for details.

|

95

square. The unoccluded parts of the edge are more “real”
than the occluded parts, because they generate their own
visual signals at the retina. But we do not know which
parts are which! Both types of parts look just as “real” to
us. Moreover, as our eyes move along a line, these “real”
and “illusory” regions may be interchanged, with no one
the wiser, as different parts of the line are occluded. In
summary, even the percept of such a simple image as a
“real” line will o!en include a series of “illusory” percepts
that just happen to look “real”.
If even “real” percepts can be “illusory”, then how do
we decide that a percept like the Kanizsa square is a visual
illusion? We can begin to understand how this happens
by using the concepts of boundary completion and surface filling-in, especially the fact that “all boundaries are
invisible.” Here is a possible tentative definition of percepts
that we tend to call visual illusions, notwithstanding that
many percepts that we believe to be real have boundaries
and surface colors that are not directly received from retinal images:
De!nition of a Visual Illusion: A visual illusion is a
percept whose combination of boundaries and surfaces
looks unfamiliar.
For example, in the percept of the offset grating of
Figure 1.1, there is a vertical boundary that has no brightness or color. We call this unfamiliar combination of
boundary and surface color an illusion. On the other
hand, the part of an edge that is perceived at the locations
over the blind spot is believed to be a “real” percept, even
though it is not due to direct visual input from the retina,
because it combines boundary and surface properties in a
familiar way.

Neon color spreading

FIGURE 3.9. Simulation of a reverse- contrast Kanizsa square
percept. See the text for details.

How do we distinguish the
“real” from the “illusory”?
What I mean by this is that our conscious percepts of those
parts of the edge that are occluded by retinal veins or the
blind spot are actively constructed by the brain, just as
are the more obviously illusory percepts like the Kanizsa

A famous example of color filling-in, called neon color
spreading, is shown in Figure 3.10. Neon color spreading
nicely illustrates three key properties of color filling-in.
The image in the right panel of Figure 3.10 consists of circular annuli, part of which are black and part blue, just
like the ones in the le! panel image. When we view this
figure, we can see an illusory square filled with a vivid, but
illusory, blue color, even though the only blue in the image
is in the blue circular arcs.
Neon color spreading was reported in 1971 by the
Italian psychologist D. Varin (Varin, 1971), who studied
a “chromatic spreading” effect that was induced when
viewing an image similar to the one in Figure 3.10. In
1975, the Dutch psychologist Harrie F. J. M. van Tuijl
(van Tuijl, 1975), and again with Charles M. M. de Weert
in 1979 (van Tuijl and de Weert, 1979), independently introduced a lattice of horizontal and vertical lines, such as
the one discussed in Figure 3.11, and called it “neon-like

96

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN
directions. Its spread is thus unoriented. The blue color
continues to spread outwardly in all directions until it
fills the illusory square boundary, beyond which it cannot
spread any further. In addition to the two filling-in properties of unoriented and outward spread, we can also add
the obvious property that filling-in is sensitive to contrast
polarity, because we can see its effects. These three properties of surface filling-in are summarized in Figure 3.7
(bottom right).

FIGURE 3.10. The visual illusion of neon color spreading.
Neither the square nor the blue color that are perceived within
it are in the image that de!nes a neon color display. The display
consists only of black and blue arcs.

FIGURE 3.11. Another example of neon color spreading. The
image is composed of black and red crosses. See the text for
details.

color spreading”. I will explain more fully below how
such illusory percepts arise from an interaction between
boundary and surface system properties that are useful
for survival.
For now, let me just assert that the black arcs and the
blue arcs in Figure 3.10 both create boundaries in our
brains. At the positions where the boundaries join, the
boundaries caused by the black arcs cause small breaks
to occur in the boundaries caused by the blue arcs. I call
these breaks end gaps. The blue color within the arcs can
spread through the end gaps into the illusory square. Color
can then spread outwardly from all these end gaps in all

Complementary
computation of boundaries
and surfaces
In Chapter 1, I proposed that the brain is organized into
parallel processing streams that o!en exhibit computationally complementary properties. Visual boundary
completion and surface filling-in provide an excellent
example of processes with complementary properties.
Figure 3.7 summarizes that boundaries are completed
inwardly between pairs or greater numbers of inducers,
in an oriented fashion, and are insensitive to contrast
polarity. On the other hand, surface filling-in proceeds
outwardly in an unoriented fashion, and is sensitive to
contrast polarity. These properties are manifestly complementary: inward vs. outward, oriented vs. unoriented, insensitive vs. sensitive. They fit together like a key and lock,
like yin and yang.
Complementarity of boundary and surface processing
is important for the success of each process. For example,
filling-in needs to be unoriented so that it can cover an
entire surface. On the other hand, the unoriented flow of
brightness can only be efficiently contained by an oriented
boundary. Likewise, a seeing process cannot efficiently
build boundaries around objects in front of textured
backgrounds. Both types of process are needed for either
process to work well. Moreover, both types of process
need to interact to overcome each other’s complementary
deficiencies.
The ability of boundaries to serve as barriers to surface filling-in provides an important example of how interactions between the boundary and surface systems help
them to achieve a better result than either one could attain
by itself. One of the challenges facing our visual system is
to combine these complementary properties into a higher
synthesis, which we experience as unified visual percepts.
Said in another way, the challenge is to reconcile the complementarity of boundary and surface properties with the
consistency of conscious percepts. I call this resolution the
property of complementary consistency.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

Complementary processing
streams in visual cortex
How are these complementary processes represented
in the brain? Much evidence suggests that they are carried out by parallel processing streams within the visual
cortex. Figure 1.21 notes that visual signals activate the
light-sensitive retinas within our eyes. The retinas, in turn,
send signals to the lateral geniculate nucleus, or LGN. The
LGN has a beautiful laminar organization that may, in first
approximation, be broken up into a parvocellular part and
a magnocellular part, so named a!er their parvocellular
and magnocellular cell types. Output signals from the
LGN branch out and activate several parallel subsystems
of the visual cortex. Figure 1.21 summarizes a simplified
description of these parallel processing streams.
Three streams are easy to track in Figure 1.21. Two of
these streams proceed from the parvocellular LGN to regions of the first cortical stage, called the striate cortex.
This cortical stage is also called area V1 in monkeys and
area 17 in cats. One of these streams goes through structures that are called the blobs of V1. Blobs were discovered by Margaret Wong-Riley in 1979 (Wong-Riley, 1979).
The blobs are small regions that are distributed in regular
arrays throughout V1. They are highly active metabolically and therefore light up when probed by a chemical
marker called cytochrome oxidase. The blobs project, in
turn, to a region that is called the thin stripes of the prestriate cortex. Thin stripes occur within an area that is
called V2 in monkeys and area 18 in cats. The thin stripes
then project to prestriate area V4. I predicted in 1984 that
the LGN→blob→thin stripe→V4 processing stream generates visual surface representations (green stream in Figure
1.21), and that the parallel LGN→interblob→interstripe→V4
processing stream generates visual boundary representations (red stream in Figure 1.21). I will, for short, call these
streams the blob and interblob streams.
Other investigators, notably Margaret Livingstone and
David Hubel (Livingstone and Hubel, 1988), have made
related but distinct proposals. They suggested that the
blob stream computes “color” and the interblob stream
computes “orientation.” Their proposal and mine lead to
different sets of predictions. In particular, a boundary
system can complete boundaries—both “real” and “illusory”— over positions in space that receive no inputs,
let alone oriented inputs, as I have illustrated with many
examples, including the offset grating and Ehrenstein illusion (Figure 1.1), Kanizsa squares (Figure 3.3), and
neon color spreading (Figures 3.10 and 3.11). Likewise, a
surface system can generate filled-in representations of
figure-ground relationships that do not directly represent
the local brightnesses and colors of a scene, as I have illustrated with examples of the Ehrenstein illusion (Figure

|

97

1.1), Kanizsa stratification and transparency (Figure 1.4),
and neon color spreading (Figures 3.10 and 3.11). Many
vision scientists now routinely use the boundary/surface
distinction to interpret their experiments.

Multiple-scale symmetrybreaking generates
complementary streams
during development
How do the complementary properties of these parallel
streams arise? I have predicted that they arise when the
brain develops as part of a process of symmetry-breaking.
This concept envisages that pairs of streams may arise from
an earlier shared set of cells that bifurcates into complementary streams as developmental specialization occurs.
This hypothesis helps to account for the related, but complementary, computational properties of each stream, as
well as the o!en topographic connections between them.
Symmetry-breaking is a widespread phenomenon in many
parts of physics and biology. In the case of the brain, current models suggest that, during brain development, there
is a cascade of symmetry-breaking operations on multiple
spatial scales, with some complementary processes arising
as sub-streams of larger streams that also exhibit complementary relationships.
Table 1.1 and Figure 3.1 illustrate these properties. Here
I will just summarize some of these complementary relationships. In later chapters, I will explain how they arise
and work. As we have already seen, visual boundaries and
surfaces are proposed to be computed in the parallel interblob and blob cortical streams (Figure 1.21). Both of these
streams occur within the more inclusive ventral What cortical processing stream (Figure 1.19). There are also complementary streams between the ventral What and dorsal
Where visual cortical streams (Figure 1.19), and complementary streams within the Where cortical processing
stream. For example, the medial temporal (MT) cortical
area carries out motion processing within the Where cortical stream. Cortical areas MT+ and MT- carry out different
aspects of motion processing, as part of computationally
complementary streams within MT. MT- and MT+ project,
respectively, to ventral medial superior temporal (MSTv)
cortex, and to dorsal medial superior temporal (MSTd)
cortex, thereby forming substreams of the Where cortical
stream from MT to MST. MT- helps to track objects moving
relative to the observer, whereas MT+ helps to control
visually-based (also called optic flow) navigation of the observer with respect to the world. Thus object tracking and
optic flow navigation are computationally complementary

98

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

streams within cortical area MT of the Where cortical
stream. I will explain how these motion processes work in
Chapters 8 and 9.
Area MT is, in turn, complementary to the pale stripe,
also called the interstripe, region in prestriate cortical area
V2. Recall from Figure 1.21 that V2 interstripes receive
inputs from V1 interblobs, and that this entire boundary
stream is part of the ventral What cortical stream. As noted
above, V2 interstripes carry out boundary grouping of static
percepts of object form. In other words, form and motion
processing, which are carried out between V2 and MT,
are complementary, as are visual tracking and navigation,
which are carried out within MT. The former complementary relationship exists between different cortical streams,
one in the What stream and the other in the Where stream,
whereas the latter relationship is carried out within complementary sub-streams of the Where stream. These interstream and intrastream complementary relationships illustrate what I mean by saying that there are multiple scales
of symmetry-breaking during the development of complementary streams within the visual cortex. The genetic and
developmental mechanisms whereby the brain may unfold
a cascade of complementary streams operating on different
spatial scales are not yet well understood. Even without this
additional understanding, it should now be clear how different Complementary Computing is from the assertion
that the brain computes using independent modules.

Special-purpose modules
or general-purpose modal
systems?
In Chapter 1, I noted that classical vision models have
o!en espoused the view that different vision processes are
represented as independent modules which carry out their
own specialized tasks. Many Artificial Intelligence models
have traditionally been of this type, as have the models
of various visual neuroscientists. In this conception, one
module might detect edges in a scene, another texture, another shading, and so on.
There are several problems with this idea. One problem
is that many natural scenes usually contain several, if not
all, of these scenic qualities in the same position. An example of this is the famous picture of Einstein’s face that
is seen in Figure 3.12, where many edges are part of texture and shading gradients. Another problem is that the
lighting of the scene may vary with time, position, or the
observer’s viewpoint. Even in cases where scenic edges,
texture, and shading are spatially separated from one another in different parts of the scene, in order for the specialized modules to be able to do their work, one would
first need a smart, general-purpose preprocessor, or front

FIGURE 3.12. In this picture of Einstein’s face, edges, texture,
and shading are overlaid.

end, that could identify what type of features were in each
particular region in order to use the correct module there.
This preprocessor would need to be so smart that it could
identify whether, say, there was a texture throughout a
given region, and would need to do this for all the types
of textures that would need to be identified. But if the
general-purpose preprocessor is that smart, then why do
we need specialized modules?
There are two possible ways to try to escape this critique. One is to restrict the visual environment so that it
contains only edges, or texture, or shading. This is how
many specialized vision algorithms have been used in
applications. For example, they may be used to process
scenes which have been carefully selected so that, given
properly controlled lighting, only object edges that are of
high enough contrast need to be detected. Clearly such an
approach can only work with a limited collection of relatively simple scenes that are under the vigilant control of
an external operator. Humans and animals do not, however, live in such simple visual environments. Our visual
worlds are filled with unexpected combinations of visual
features. These features are, moreover, lit differently with
every passing moment.
The other possible answer is that the brain has a
general-purpose vision system that can process many different combinations of visual features, even unfamiliar
ones, and can do so under variable lighting conditions.
Boundaries are, for example, not just representations of
an object’s edges. Boundaries can also represent formsensitive combinations of edges, texture, shading, and
depth information. Likewise, surfaces represent combinations of brightness, color, depth, form, and figure-ground
information. Processes whose computational units can

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

represent so many types of information are said to multiplex this information. Multiplexing combines multiple
types of information at individual nerve cells. The complementary properties of boundaries and surfaces in Figure
3.7 illustrate one type of multiplexing. The patterning of
information, or its spatial context, across many such cells
disambiguates its meaning in a context-sensitive way.
Indeed, if you view the picture of Einstein’s face through
a small aperture, then you just see a jumble of edges, textures, and shading which, taken alone, mean nothing.

The architecture is the
algorithm
More examples of complementarity, such as those summarized in Table 1.1, Figure 3.1, and briefly discussed above,
will be described in greater detail throughout the book. In
every case, they help to achieve a general-purpose competence within a prescribed modality of intelligence, such
as vision, audition, cognition, emotion, or sensory-motor
control. It is in this sense that the brain is designed to realize general-purpose solutions of modal problems. Such
solutions are far more general than the special-purpose
algorithms of Artificial Intelligence. But they are far less
general than the computations of a modern von Neumann
computer. By being general-purpose in each modality of
intelligence—hence the name modal problem—the brain
can handle many types of inputs and tasks in that particular modality. But no single system of the brain can do
everything. Brain systems that carry out different modal
behaviors have different anatomical designs, and may cooperate and compete in specific ways that enable the entire
brain to achieve goals that individual modal systems could
not achieve on their own. This insight is o!en summarized by the phrase: “The architecture is the algorithm”;
namely, the emergent properties that can solve a given
modal problem, or several modal problems interacting,
depend upon how the anatomy and neurobiology of that
brain system have been specialized through development
and learning to solve its tasks.

A new geometry:
Cooperation and
competition across space
and orientation
The concepts of boundary completion and surface fillingin also represent a radical break with classical geometrical

|

99

concepts that mathematical scientists have developed over
the centuries with which to describe the “real” world. In
school, we learn geometrical concepts about lines and
curves that have been known since at least the work of the
great mathematician Euclid in ancient Greece. We learn,
for example, that a line or curve is made up of a series of
points. We also learn how to define surfaces using concepts like surface elements and the normals, or perpendicular lines, to each surface element. These concepts were
developed by the great nineteenth century German mathematicians Karl Friedrich Gauss and Bernhard Riemann,
among others, and have been used with great success to
mathematically characterize surfaces for over a century.
When we ask, however, “What are the units of visual
perception? Are they the familiar units of classical geometry that we have learned in school?”, we need to answer
“Emphatically not!” A line or curve, at least as it is defined
by classical geometry, is just a set of individual points that
are organized in a prescribed way. Such a set of points has
no internal coherence; each point can be chosen independently of the others. To understand how we see lines and
curves, we need to replace these classical concepts with
that of a boundary, or perceptual grouping. A boundary is
an emergent property, with a coherent structure that arises
from several types of interactions among the many cells
that respond to the line stimulus.
For example, in Figure 3.3c, lines are drawn perpendicular to the orientations of the Kanizsa square with each
line ending at one of the illusory square boundaries. As a
result, the square boundaries are strengthened along their
entire length. Said in another way: The lines whose ends
are perpendicular to the emerging square boundary cooperate with the parallel edges of the pac-men that induce
them to generate the boundary. In contrast, in Figure 3.3d,
lines are drawn that intersect where the square boundaries would usually be. These lines interfere with the formation of the square boundaries by a process of orientational
competition. This boundary suppression occurs despite the
fact that there is no change in the pac-man inducers that
would otherwise generate them. These examples illustrate
that cooperation and competition, across both space and
orientation, determine the final outcome of the boundary
completion process. How these processes work will be discussed in greater detail below.
Here is another famous example: Start with the le!
image of Figure 3.13, that defines a vivid Ehrenstein circle
enclosing a bright disk. Now tilt the orientations of the
lines without changing the positions of the line endpoints.
Then, as the right image shows, the percepts of the circle
and disk are greatly weakened, even though none of the
endpoints of the lines is changed. If the Ehrenstein circle
were “just” a series of points going through the endpoints
of these lines, then nothing would have changed.
Taken together, the Kanizsa square (Figure 3.3) and
Ehrenstein circle (Figure 3.13) show that boundaries form

100

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN
is a range of orientations at each line end that can cooperate in a grouping, and that the best combination of
these grouping inducers is chosen to form a possible global
grouping, while inhibiting other boundaries that have less
support from nearby inducers. In this case, locally unpreferred orientations that are not perpendicular to their line
ends are selected because they can cooperate to form a
globally preferred boundary shape.

FIGURE 3.13. The Ehrenstein percept in the left panel is significantly weakened as the orientations of the lines that induce it
deviate from being perpendicular to the illusory circle.

best when they are either (almost) parallel to lines, as in
Kanizsa squares, or (almost) perpendicular to line ends,
as in Ehrenstein circles. It is also clear from Figure 3.13
that orientations that are too far from being perpendicular
to a line end cannot support an emergent boundary. On
the other hand, perfect perpendicularity is not required,
either. The emergent circle and square percepts that are
induced by the two images in the top row of Figure 3.14
show that locally preferred perpendicular line ends may
induce either a circular or square boundary. In the square
boundary percept, the boundary changes its orientation
abruptly to match the orientation of its nearest inducers.
In both cases, the locally preferred perpendicular orientations can group together to form the globally preferred
boundary shape.
In contrast, the bottom image in Figure 3.14 induces
a boundary whose orientations are not perpendicular to
their respective line ends. This figure shows that there

FIGURE 3.14. Boundaries are completed with the orientations
that receive the largest total amount of evidence, or support.
Some can form in the locally preferred orientations that are perpendicular to the inducing lines, while others can form through
orientations that are not locally preferred, thus showing that
there is initially a fuzzy band of almost perpendicular initial
grouping orientations at the end of each line.

From fuzzy to sharp
groupings: Hierarchical
resolution of uncertainty
Why are there multiple possible orientations at line ends
that can support a global boundary grouping? If perfect
alignment of a single possible orientation at each line end
were required before grouping could start, then there
would be a vanishingly small probability that boundary
completion could begin. However, our brains are made out
of meat, not silicon! They cannot be expected to operate
with the precision of a computer chip. Instead, the receptive fields of the cells that create the groupings—that is,
the spatial distribution of inputs that can drive the cell—
must be coarse enough to enable multiple nearly collinear
and nearly orientationally aligned inducers to start the
grouping process. As a result, when a boundary grouping
first starts to form, multiple orientations can start to
group, leading to a web of possible groupings that are initially fuzzy across space (Figure 3.15, le! column). This
fuzziness can be understood as the embodiment within
these receptive fields of perceptual experiences with nearly
collinear and aligned visual stimuli during cortical development. However, if all perceptual groupings remained
fuzzy, visual perception would be significantly degraded.
In fact, most consciously recognized groupings are
spatially sharp (Figure 3.15, right column), as we have seen
in multiple examples above. Given that groupings start
out fuzzy in order to enable grouping to begin, why are

FIGURE 3.15. A fuzzy band of possible initial grouping orientations allows grouping to get started. Cooperative- competitive
feedback via a hierarchical resolution of uncertainty chooses a
sharp !nal grouping that has the most evidence to support it.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

so many completed boundaries sharp? We will see below
how feedback within the boundary system can rapidly
choose a final grouping that is maximally consistent with
the spatial organization of the positional and orientational
evidence in all of its inducers. This feedback uses a combination of cooperation and competition to choose the
strongest grouping that has accommodate all of its inducers. This feedback process provides another example of
hierarchical resolution of uncertainty. A number of such
hierarchical resolutions are needed to generate sufficiently
complete, context-sensitive, and stable perceptual representations upon which effective actions can be based. I will
offer explanations of them all before using them to explain
how they can help us to understand where, how, and why
in our brains our visual percepts become conscious.
Not all boundaries are as spatially separated as they
are in the examples of Kanizsa squares, Ehrenstein disks,
and Kanizsa stratification percepts. In response to shaded
and textured objects, for example, the boundaries that
form typically create a form-sensitive boundary web that
fits itself to the statistics of the shading and texture in the
object. When we see a shaded or textured object in depth,
that percept is typically supported by multiple boundary
webs, each one created by cells with different receptive
field sizes, or scales. I will explain why and how this happens in this chapter, Chapter 4, and especially Chapter
11. Classical geometrical concepts about surfaces, such as
surface elements and normals, are hereby replaced by concepts of surface filling-in within a multiple-scale boundary
web. How boundary webs form, and how surfaces fill-in
within them, will also provide us with additional examples
of complementary computing and hierarchical resolution
of uncertainty.

Grouping of shading
and texture, breaking
camouflage, and 3D
percepts of 2D pictures
Recognition is facilitated by invisible boundary groupings. We can now better understand how visual illusions
help to understand how the visual brain works. First, by
their very unfamiliarity, they vividly draw our attention
to important perceptual processes that we might otherwise take for granted. Second, many of them are crucial
for our survival, as is illustrated by the fact that the percept
even of an object’s edge may be illusory due to occlusions
caused by the blind spot and retinal veins, as illustrated
in Figure 3.6, or may be constructed to better recognize
textured images such as the Dalmatian in snow (Figure

|

101

1.2). Boundaries will only be seen if they fill-in the surface
representation of a bounded object with a different brightness, color, or depth than its background, as in the case of
the Kanizsa square percept that is generated by the image
in Figure 3.3a and simulated in Figure 3.8.
Much neurophysiological evidence suggest that critical
stages of visual object recognition occurs in the inferotemporal, or IT, cortex, whereas perceptual boundaries and
surfaces are formed in the earlier interblob and blob processing streams of the visual cortex, as illustrated in Figure
1.21. We can recognize boundaries that we cannot see in
part because recognition and seeing are carried out by different parts of the brain.
The Dalmatian in snow example is important because
it illustrates a problem that our ancestors confronted in
the wild. Imagine that the image is not of a Dalmatian,
but rather of a deadly predator, such as a snow leopard,
that is stealthily tracking you in the snow. All that you can
see are the predator’s spots, because its white coat blends
into the snow. By using your emergent invisible boundaries, you can hopefully recognize the predator in time to
initiate evasive or other survival techniques. Emergent
boundaries, whether invisible or not, hereby help us to
break through camouflage in the many situations where
local properties of an object—such as its curves and surface elements—would be insufficient for its recognition. In
fact, one way to disable our ability to break through camouflage is to generate images whose orientations create
emergent boundary groupings that compete with those of
the target.
Emergent boundary orientations obey Gestalt rules:
Diagonals from horizontals and verticals. Figures
3.16-3.18 provide some other examples of how invisible
boundary groupings can segregate textured regions from
one another, or separate figures from their backgrounds.
Figure 3.16 is a famous image due to the distinguished
American psychologist, Jacob Beck (Beck, 1966), who died
in 2003. It is a texture composed of the letters L and T.
Although the regions with vertical and diagonal T’s are
contiguous, the vertical T’s group together with the vertical L’s, rather than with the diagonal T’s. One reason for
this is that the vertical T’s and L’s both have vertical and
horizontal lines, whereas the diagonal T’s do not. Invisible
vertical and horizontal emergent boundaries can connect, and thereby group together, the vertical T’s and L’s,
but cannot link the diagonal T’s with the vertical T’s. The
boundary grouping process is thus sensitive to the relative
orientations of image contrasts. As in the boundary which
completes the Kanizsa square, inducer orientations that
are collinear—that is, have the same orientation and are
aligned across space—are strongly favored in the grouping
process. Because the properties of boundary grouping can
occur automatically at an earlier processing stage than the
one that recognizes T’s and L’s, this percept is consistent

102

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 3.16. T’s and L’s group together based on shared orientations, not identities.

with the hypothesis that collinear grouping occurs in prestriate visual cortex, notably in cortical area V2, before the
emergent boundary and surface representations that are
formed there are passed to the inferotemporal cortex for
object recognition, as indicated in Figure 1.21.
The texture in Figure 3.17, which was studied by Jacob
Beck, Anne Sutter, and Richard Ivry (Beck, Sutter, and Ivry,
1987), illustrates that boundary grouping is sensitive to
the distance between the inducing elements. It is easier for
boundaries to form between elements that are closer together,
other things being equal. Such Gestalt rules for visual perception were proposed by German psychologists like Wolfgang
Köhler (Henle, 1971) and Max Wertheimer (Wertheimer,
1961) during the first half of the twentieth century.
Figure 3.17 is called a tripartite texture because, although the entire picture is constructed from black
squares on a white background, our brains group it into
three distinct regions. Each of the black squares in the
le! and right regions is closer to one another in the horizontal than vertical direction. As a result, our brains form
horizontal boundaries between the collinear tops of the
squares, as well as the between the collinear bottoms of
the squares, thereby grouping the squares into perceived
rows. The boundaries between the squares are invisible.
In the middle region, emergent diagonal boundaries are
perceived, even though there are no diagonal orientations
in any of the individual squares, but only horizontal and
vertical orientations. The global arrangement of the square
inducers is thus sensitive to both relative position and orientation in determining which grouping will win.
Figure 3.18 is a computer simulation of these grouping
properties that Ennio Mingolla and I published in 1987
(Grossberg and Mingolla, 1987). Although each of the
four input images in parts (a), (c), (e), and (g) of Figure
3.18 is composed of three columns of three objects each
composed of six vertical line segments, their spatial arrangement can generate strikingly different percepts. The
grouping induced in Figure 3.18b by the image in Figure
3.18a is of emergent vertical boundaries. The grouping
induced in Figure 3.18d by the image in Figure 3.18c is

FIGURE 3.17. The relative positions of the squares give rise to
a percept of three regions. In the middle region, emergent diagonal groupings form, despite the fact that all the orientations in
the image are verticals and horizontals.

one of both emergent vertical and horizontal boundaries. The grouping induced in Figure 3.18f by the image in
Figure 3.18e is of horizontal emergent boundaries. Finally,
the grouping induced in Figure 3.18h by the image in
Figure 3.18g is of both emergent horizontal and diagonal
boundaries. Percepts of horizontal or diagonal boundaries emerge in response to the images in Figures 3.18c,
3.18e, and 3.18g even though there are only vertical line
segments in the inducing images. The global arrangement
of the line elements determines which grouping will win.
These boundary properties simulate the kinds of grouping
possibilities that are illustrated by the image in Figure 3.17.
They also use the same grouping mechanisms that give
rise to the percepts of neon color spreading in response to
Figure 3.10 and 3.11, and that I will explain below.
Perceiving the forest before the trees: Typography portraits. One implication of this result can immediately be
illustrated in Figure 3.19, where the boundaries of the letters E, S, A, and H are generated as emergent properties of
groupings of the letters A, H, E, and S, respectively. This
sort of global “forest before trees” structuring of a percept
was particularly emphasized by David Navon (Navon,
1977). In the vertical parts of the global letter S, parallel,
or collinear, grouping of local orientations is used, whereas
in the horizontal parts of the S, groupings perpendicular
to the local orientations form the emergent boundary. The
top, le!, and right sides of the global letter E, in contrast,
complete groupings that are diagonal to the orientations

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

|

103

they organized from these color patches, can be
recognized as objects in a scene.
Many perceptual skills that we take for
granted in real life build upon these properties of
emergent boundaries. For example, Figure 3.21a
shows a texture of short line segments with different orientations. Some of the lines are approximately collinear. As in the Kanizsa square, they
can get grouped together collinearly by amodal
boundaries and the entire emergent boundary
can “pop out” for fast recognition. In response to
Figure 3.21b, an emergent boundary can separate the figure of the zebra from the background.
This is an example of figure-ground separation. As in Figures 3.18 and 3.19, this emergent
boundary is in some positions perpendicular to
the inducing contrasts and in other positions diagonal with respect to them. Why does the zebra
look like it is in front of the background, even
though both the zebra and background lie in the
FIGURE 3.18. Computer simulations in b, c, f, and h of groupings in response
to different spatial arrangements in a, c, e, and g of inducers that are composed
same picture plane? One factor is the existence
of short vertical boundaries. Note the emergent horizontal groupings in d, f,
of T-junctions in the image; namely, positions
and h, and the diagonal groupings in h, despite the fact that all its inducers have
where boundaries intersect in approximately
vertical orientations.
the shape of a T. How T-junctions can cause this
figure-ground percept will be explained below.
The zebra percept illustrates the fact that
of the constituent letters A, yet only horizontal and vera 2D image can give rise to a 3D percept. As I noted in
tical orientations occur in the emergent global boundary
Chapter 1, all movies and pictorial art exploit this basic
contour of the E. Figure 3.19 hereby vividly illustrates how
fact. Figure 3.21c provides a particularly vivid example
multiple orientations can cooperation to induce boundary
completion of an object.
These grouping properties have also
inspired many artists. Figure 3.20 shows
a Typography Portrait by the artist Sean
Williams that is entirely composed of letters whose various orientations generate
a vivid global grouping of a face, while
also spelling out multiple embedded
phrases; see https://www.pinterest.it/pin/
408349891190092040/.
Many percepts that we observe in
real life are illusions of this type. We are
continually separating figures from their
backgrounds based on boundary groupings that form between regions with
different textures and colors. As we will
discuss below, many visual artists, notably the Impressionists and Fauvists,
exploited this property of visual perception to create some of the most beautiful
paintings ever made. They were masters
at showing how to arrange small patches
of color on a canvas in such a way that the
invisible groupings that were thereby induced in the brain, and the surfaces that FIGURE 3.19. As in Figure 3.18, emergent groupings can form whose orientations
differ from those of the inducing stimuli.

104

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 3.20. This typography portrait by Sean Williams exploits how boundaries can form through non-preferred orientations of their inducers.

of this fact. Percepts that are induced by images like this
were studied by James Todd and Robin Akerstrom in an
important paper that they published in 1987 (Todd and

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Akerstrom, 1987). This image is built up from spatially
separated black shapes, as was the Dalmatian in snow in
Figure 1.2. However, due to the different sizes, orientations, and spatial arrangement of the discrete black shapes,
a percept is generated of a continuously curved 3D surface.
Note that the spatial scale of the shapes is smaller near the
bounding contour of the figure. This kind of perspective
effect enables boundary cells of different sizes, or scales,
to form emergent boundary groupings in response to different parts of the image, with the smallest boundary cells
responding most near the bounding contour.
Each spatial scale of boundary cells hereby generates
a boundary web that tends to be aligned with the dominant orientations of the inducing image contrasts. One
can think of these boundary webs as a continuously varying version across space of the boundaries that form in response to the simpler figures in Figure 3.18. These depthselective boundary webs project to depth-selective surface
representations where filling-in of surface brightness and
color occur (Figure 3.22). The boundary web inputs to
these surface Filling-In Domains, or FIDOs, are called
Boundary Contour, or BC, signals. These BC signals capture surface brightness and color signals, called Feature
Contour, or FC, signals in the FIDOs. When these captured signals fill in within their depth-selective domains,
the total filled-in surface representation, across all the
filling-in domains, generates the percept of a continuously
curved 3D surface.
More will be said about how boundary
webs form in the next chapter, and especially in
Chapter 11, which is devoted to explaining in
greater detail how we see the world in depth. Even
now, however, several properties of this percept
illustrate how radically different visual boundaries and surfaces are from classical mathematical
concepts of curves and surfaces. For one, a 2D
image can generate a 3D percept. This, in itself,
challenges classical concepts of the dimension of
a space. For another, the spatially discrete black
shapes generate a continuously curved surface
percept. We do not see the emergent boundary
webs that support this continuous percept because “all boundaries are invisible”. What we see
are the filled-in surface brightnesses and colors
that result when their FC inputs fill-in within
depth-selective boundary webs.

FIGURE 3.21. Four examples of how emergent boundaries can form in
response to different kinds of images. These examples illustrate how boundary webs can shape themselves to textures, as in (c), and shading, as in (d), in
addition to lines, as in (a). In all these cases, the boundaries are invisible, but
reveal themselves by supporting !lling-in of surface brightness and color
within their form-sensitive webs.

3D curved shapes from !lling-in within
multiple-scale invisible boundary webs. The
picture of a shaded ellipse in Figure 3.21d illustrates these and other important points even
more vividly. This 2D picture of a shaded ellipse
generates a 3D percept of an ellipsoid. How does
this happen? The first thing to notice is that this
percept could not be explained if we used only

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

the classical concept of an edge. There is only one edge
in this image, the bounding edge that surrounds the ellipse. If one thought that boundaries were only edges, then
there would be nothing to prevent the gray shading inside
the ellipse from spreading throughout its interior via surface filling-in, as it does to generate the percept of neon
color spreading in Figures 3.10 and 3.11 until it reaches the
bounding edge, yielding a percept of a uniformly gray 2D
ellipse. This is, however, emphatically not what we see!
What happens instead is that multiple scales of
boundary cells group together in form-sensitive boundary
webs. As in the case of the textured disk image, the smallest cells preferentially group near the bounding contour of
the ellipse. When all the boundary webs project to their respective depth-selective surface filling-in domains (Figure
3.22), they trap the gray that occurs within their own
boundary web. The total filled-in surface representation,
across all the filling-in domains, generates the percept of
a 3D ellipsoid.
You might still object: “If these boundary webs are
so important, then why don’t we see them?” The answer
is: “We do see them, but only indirectly through their effects on surface filling-in.” You might then ask: “But why
is that?” to which the answer is “Because all boundaries
are invisible!”
Boundary webs support percepts of Impressionist paintings. The French Impressionists exploited this property
of visual perception to create some of the most beautiful
paintings ever made. Pointillists like Georges Seurat and
Paul Signac were masters at arranging small patches, or
“points”, of color on a canvas in such a way that the groupings and filled-in surface regions that were thereby induced in the brain could be recognized as objects in the

FIGURE 3.22. Depth-selective boundary representations cap-

ture brightnesses and colors in surface !lling-in domains. See the
text for details.

|

105

world. The famous painting by Seurat called A Sunday on
La Grande Jatte illustrates this kind of mastery (Figure
3.23). The Impressionists understood implicitly how to
“break camouflage” for aesthetic purposes, and to thereby
induce emergent forms that are not explicitly represented
within the brush strokes of their paintings. Of course, the
Impressionists and other visual artists did not use only
boundaries to generate our percepts of their paintings.
They also sensitively probed how to compose surfaces
suffused with brightness and color, and how these qualities mutually influence one another in a context-sensitive
manner.
From Seurat to SAR. The same principles that help to
explain how we understand a pointillist painting can
also be used to generate effective representations of radar
images whose pixels may differ in luminance by five orders
of magnitude of power in the radar return. In 1989, my
PhD student William Ross, and I, together with Ennio
Mingolla, and in cooperation with colleagues at MIT
Lincoln Laboratories, processed Synthetic Aperture Radar,
or SAR, images to generate boundary and surface representations that can easily be interpreted by human observers (Mingolla, Ross, and Grossberg, 1999). SAR is the kind
of radar that can see through the weather. It is used in applications for remote sensing and mapping of the surfaces
of the Earth and other planets. Figure 3.24 summarizes
the processing of a SAR image showing a road crossing
over a highway in a wooded area of New York State. The
image in the lower right corner is the reconstruction of the
original image in the upper le! corner. The original image
(Figure 3.24 (le! column, top row) looks so dark on the
limited dynamic range of the printed page because a small
number of very high luminance pixels drives most of the
image luminances towards zero values. A!er the image is

FIGURE 3.23. The pointillist painting A Sunday on La Grande
Jatte by Georges Seurat illustrates how we group together both
large-scale coherence among the pixels of the painting, as well as
forming small groupings around the individual dabs of color.

106

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

normalized to a more manageable range, as in Figure 3.24
(right column, top row), one can clearly see its “pointillist”
structure. This normalized image is then used to control
both boundary completion and surface filling-in. Figure
3.24 (le! column, bottom row) shows how the boundaries
form in response to the most statistically regular combinations of normalized activities. The surface reconstruction of the image in Figure 3.24 (right column, bottom
row) is created by filling-in the upper right normalized
image within the boundaries within the lower le! image.
This filled-in surface representation exhibits the tiny posts
along the sides of the road just as vividly as the large-scale
structure of the trees and their shadows in the top half of
the scene.
From the Optical Society of America to working with
MIT Lincoln Laboratories. Our work on processing
images that were created with artificial sensors, such as
SAR, began unexpectedly in 1985 a!er I gave a lecture at
the annual Optical Society of America conference about
our work on understanding vision. A few group leaders at MIT Lincoln Laboratories heard my talk. Lincoln
Labs is in Lexington, Massachusetts. It is a United States
Department of Defense research and development center
that is chartered to apply advanced technology to problems of national security (https://www.ll.mit.edu/about).

Among its many projects, it was perhaps the leading research laboratory in the country at that time for developing and applying artificial sensors of various kinds to
large-scale civilian and military applications, including
SAR, laser radar, multispectral infrared, night vision, and
so on. These program managers thought that the ability of
our models to deal with the kinds of discontinuities, noise,
and large dynamic range of the images that their artificial sensors created would be natural tools for processing
them, unlike more traditional algorithms.
Their intuition turned out to be correct. I was invited to give a year-long lecture series on my neural network research at the Labs. These lectures were videotaped
and passed around the Labs. The Lincoln Labs Director
watched them, and concluded from them that the time was
ripe to carry out a national study of neural networks. This
led to the DARPA Neural Network Study from October,
1987 to February, 1988, which issued an influential report
that energized funding for the entire neural networks field.
Also, within the Labs, our models were used to successfully process all the kinds of image data that I just listed.
This kind of symbiosis between rigorous biological modeling and technological application continued for many
years. Many of the students and postdoctoral fellows who
came to study with me were interested in both, o!en with
an emphasis on one or the other. Several of them became
lab members or even group leaders at
Lincoln Labs.

Did Matisse know
that “all boundaries
are invisible”?

FIGURE 3.24. In response to the Synthetic Aperture Image (upper left corner), a
shunting on- center off-surround network “discounts the illuminant” and thereby normalizes cell activities to compute feature contours, without causing saturation (upper
right corner). Multiple-scale boundaries form in response to spatially coherent activities in the feature contours (lower left corner) and create the webs, or containers, into
which the feature contours !ll-in the !nal surface representations (lower right corner).

The great French artist Henri Matisse, who
lived from 1869 until 1854, was a particularly insightful observer and innovator in
exploiting interactions between the brain’s
boundary and surface processes for aesthetic purposes. For example, Matisse
wrote about “the eternal conflict between
drawing and color . . . Instead of drawing
an outline and filling in the color . . . I am
drawing directly in color” (Matisse, 1947/
1992). We can interpret his aesthetic intuitions about drawing and color in terms
of the distinct properties of boundaries
and surfaces. In particular, I believe that
Matisse intuitively understood that “all
boundaries are invisible.” By this I mean
the following.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

|

107

The Fauvists, or les Fauves (French for “the
wild beasts”), emphasized the use of vivid colors
and painterly qualities in creating their pictures.
Matisse, who was one of the leading practitioners of Fauvism, developed a painterly technique
whereby he could “draw directly with color” and
could do so without surrounding these colors with
explicit, differently colored, outlines. One purpose
FIGURE 3.26. How “drawing directly in color” leads to colored surface
of such outlines in more traditional paintings and representations. Amodal boundary webs control the !lling-in of color within
drawings was to group together several colored these surface representations. See the text for details.
regions into representations of object surfaces.
How does “drawing directly in color” change
darken the colors in the surface representations. In this
how a painting looks? If instead of drawing disense, Matisse intuitively realized that “all boundaries are
rectly in color, Matisse drew visible outlines around his
invisible” through the masterful way in which he arranged
surfaces, and did so in a dark color, then these contours
his colors on canvas to generate boundaries that could
could darken the surface colors of the entire scene, via color
support compelling surface representations.
assimilation. Color assimilation occurs due to mechanisms
Several of his famous paintings of 1905, including The
whereby boundaries control the filling-in of surface color.
Roofs of Collioure and The Open Window (Figure 3.27),
Figure 4.10 below will provide a simulation of color assimwent a step further. They combined discrete color patches
ilation. Matisse, however, wanted to create bright, glowing
and continuous regions of surface color to generate harsurface colors, which were a goal of the entire Fauve movemonious surface representations in which both types
ment to which he belonged. He therefore figured out how
of strokes are unified. By thinking about these paintto prevent the darkening and other distorting effects of
ings from the perspective of brain processes, I find them
visibly drawn contours, without preventing a viewer from
to be brilliantly insightful, even brazenly so, because of
perceiving the surface representations of the objects that
how boldly Matisse interspersed discrete and continuous
are needed to fully appreciate his paintings.
brush strokes that combined together into a beautiful
Matisse was already “drawing directly in color” in
harmonious scene.
his paintings from the Fauve period, as illustrated in his
Matisse had a life-long interest in these issues. It was in
painting from 1905 called The Roofs of Collioure (Figure
his book Jazz, which he published in 1947 towards the end
3.25). He showed how patches of pure color, when laid
of his life, that he wrote the above quote about the exquisite
down properly on a canvas, could be grouped by the brain
paper cutout maquettes that he created during this period,
into emergent boundaries, without the intervention of viswhen he could no longer manage the rigors of painting:
ible outlines. These emergent boundaries, in turn, could
“Instead of drawing an outline and filling in the color . . . I
trigger filling-in of the colors into perceived surface repream drawing directly in color.” He struggled for a long time
sentations of objects (Figure 3.26). The trick was that these
during his life to figure out how to do this in a masterful
emergent boundaries, being invisible, or amodal, did not
way, I think, because “all boundaries are invisible.” How
this actually happens is not an easy thing to understand
without scientific concepts and methods.
Matisse also illustrated through his art one of the
most perplexing subtleties about boundaries and surfaces;
namely, both boundaries and surfaces can be activated
by the same visual features in the world, or by the same
strokes of color in a picture (Figure 3.26), as illustrated by
how the retina, through the LGN, activates both the interblob and blob streams of the visual cortex (Figure 1.21).
Boundaries and surfaces are activated in parallel, but they
respond in different ways to the same external stimuli because boundary and surface properties are computationally complementary (Figure 3.7), as neon color spreading
vividly illustrates (Figure 3.10 and 3.11). Because boundaries and surfaces may be coactivated by the same visual features, there is o!en such a close correlation between them
that it is o!en hard to separate an invisible boundary from
FIGURE 3.25. The Roofs of Collioure by Matisse. See the text for
the surface filling-in properties that may render it visible.
details.

108

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 3.27. Matisse’s painting Open Window, Collioure
combines continuously colored surfaces with color patches that
created surface representations using amodal boundaries, as in
Figure 3.26. Both kinds of surfaces cooperate to form the !nal
painterly percept.

Boundary contrast,
assimilation, chiaroscuro,
and the watercolor illusion
Color assimilation due to !lling-in across weakened
boundaries in the watercolor illusion. A striking example of color assimilation due to visible contours is the
watercolor illusion of Baingio Pinna (Pinna, 1987; Figure
3.28), a contemporary Italian vision scientist whom many
colleagues think is a worthy successor to Kanizsa. Although
Kanizsa holds a unique place in the history of Italian visual
science, I share this high opinion of Pinna. In Figure 3.28,
dark blue wavy lines surround light blue wavy lines. The
resulting percept shows whole regions filled with the light
blue color. In other words, these regions “assimilate” the
color of the light blue wavy lines. I have explained this variant of color assimilation using neural mechanisms that are
summarized below (Pinna and Grossberg, 2005). In particular, for reasons that I will soon explain, competition
occurs between nearby boundaries. The image in Figure
3.28 generates boundaries wherever contrasts change rapidly enough across space, such as where a dark blue contour abuts the white background, or a dark blue contour
abuts a light blue contour, or a light blue contour abuts
the white background. The strongest of these boundaries
occurs where a dark blue contour abuts the white background, since these are the positions in the image with the
largest contrast. My explanation proposes that a stronger

FIGURE 3.28. The watercolor illusion of Baingio Pinna can
be explained using spatial competition between like- oriented
boundary signals. This occurs at what I have called the First
Competitive Stage. This is one stage in the brain’s computation
of hypercomplex cells, which are also called endstopped complex cells. Why the blue regions seem to bulge in depth may be
explained using multiple-scale, depth-selective boundary webs.
See the text for details.

boundary can inhibit a nearby weaker boundary more than
conversely. When the light blue boundaries are weakened
in this way, the light blue color that they would otherwise
contain can spread across the weakened boundary, and be
assimilated, into the contiguous white surface via surface
filling-in.
The filled-in watercolor regions also seem to bulge in
3D, a property that can be traced to how boundary webs
respond to the spatial gradient of boundary contrasts. In
particular, the boundaries formed in response to the watercolor image proceed from stronger to weaker across
space. The strongest are the white-to-(dark blue) boundaries, then the (dark blue)-to-(light blue) boundaries, and
finally the (light blue)-to-white boundaries. This discrete
boundary gradient is a spatially discrete analog of the continuous boundary web that is caused by the shaded ellipse
of Figure 3.21d. In both examples, the 3D percept may be
explained by how boundary cells with different size receptive fields, or spatial scales, react differently to the discrete
or continuous change in contrasts. This multiple-scale
boundary response creates multiple-depth boundary webs
that capture surface color at different depths and fill-in
a 3D surface percept. I will describe how this works in
greater detail in Chapter 11.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

|

109

Multiple-scale
boundary
webs and the depthful percepts of chiaroscuro and
trompe l’oeil. This bulging
effect can also be found as a
result of the painterly technique of chiaroscuro, whereby
light and dark paints are organized in gradients that
cause a percept of a bulging 3D figure instead of the
actual 2D painted surface.
Leonardo da Vinci was one
of the first painters to master
the chiaroscuro technique.
The self-portrait by the young
FIGURE 3.30. The triptych of Joe Baer, called Primary Light Group: Red, Green, and Blue, generates waRembrandt in Figure 3.29 tercolor
illusion percepts which, when displayed side by side in a museum, create a striking impression.
(le! panel), painted in 1629
when he was 23 years old, and
interest that Baer was earlier drawn to how percepts of surnow hanging in the Mauritshuis, The Hague, illustrates how
face color could spread beyond the positions in a painting
chiaroscuro can generate a vivid percept of depth. So too
where it is applied, just as Matisse was drawn to drawing
do the trompe l’oeil paintings of the contemporary British
directly in color without outlines.
painter, Graham Rust (Rust, 1988; Figure 3.29, right panel).
The watercolor illusion already appeared in paintings
of the minimalist American artist, Jo Baer, in the 1960s.
Her entry in Wikipedia notes: “In many works that Baer
created between 1964 and 1966, the peripheries and edges
of the canvas continued to be marked by two square or
rectangular bands of color. The outer, thicker border was
black; inside it, a thinner band was painted in another color,
such as red, green, lavender, or blue” (https://en.wikipedia.
Many other artists have also struggled with how to repreorg/wiki/Jo_Baer). Figure 3.30 shows her triptych called
sent object surfaces without drawing explicit boundaries
Primary Light Group: Red, Green, Blue that was painted in
around them, including the leading members of the Cape
1964– 65 and is now part of the Museum of Modern Art
Cod school of art, notably Charles Hawthorne, its founder,
collection in New York. Scientists like Baingio Pinna have
and his most famous student, Henry Hensche. The Cape
done many variations of the watercolor illusion to better
Cod school championed painting en plein air and was thus
understand its perceptual properties, but it is of historical
especially interested in representing the vivid colors of
natural scenes seen in full sunlight or the lighting of other
times of day. Their statements below, which were aimed at
teaching the art of seeing and painting, reflect some of the
same themes that concerned Matisse.
Hawthorne (Hawthorne, 1938/1960) wrote: “Beauty in
art is the delicious notes of color one against the other .(.(.
all we have to do is to get the color notes in their proper
relation” (p. 18). “. . . put down spots of color . . . the outline and size of each spot of color against every other spot
of color it touches, is the only kind of drawing you need
bother about . . . Let color make form—do not make form
and color it. Forget about drawing . . .” (pp. 25–26). “You
don’t hear me say much about drawing. It is because I think
drawing the form, and painting, are better separated. The
FIGURE 3.29. The 3D percepts that are generated by chiaroscuro
first thing is to learn to see color” (pp. 41–42).
and trompe l’oeil both exploit the same kind of multiple-scale,
Hensche further developed these concepts and put
depth-selective boundary webs that create the impression of a 3D
them
into a historical context in which Monet played a
bulge of the blue regions in the watercolor percept in Figure 3.28.

Cape Cod School of Art:
Hawthorne and Hensche
and plein air painting

110

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 3.32. Claude Monet’s painting of Poppies Near
Argenteuil. See the text for details.

FIGURE 3.31. Henry Hensche’s painting of The Bather is suffused with light.

pivotal role (Hensche, 1988): “When Monet came along . . .
he revolutionized the ‘art of seeing.’ . . . it was the method
of expressing light in color, and not value, to allow the key
of nature to show clearly . . . The landscape helped Monet
determine how color expressing the light key was the first
ingredient in a painting, not drawing” (Robichaux, 1997, p.
27). “The untrained eye is fooled to think he sees forms by
the model edges, not with color...Fool the eye into seeing
form without edges” (Robichaux, 1997, p. 31). “Every form
change must be a color change” (Robichaux, 1997, p. 33).
Figure 3.31 illustrates how Hensche applied these ideas to
suffuse with light his still life of The Bather.

Claude Monet and
Impressionist painting:
Seeing the forest and
the leaves
Weak boundaries, as in the watercolor effect, have also been
used to good effect by many artists other than Jo Baer, including Claude Monet. For example, in the famous painting
The Poppy Field Near Argenteuil (Figure 3.32) that Monet

painted in 1873, now in the collection of Musée d’Orsay in
Paris, the red poppies and the green field around them are
painted to have almost the same luminance; that is, they
are almost equiluminant. As a result, the boundaries between the red and green regions are weak and positionally
unstable, thereby facilitating an occasional impression of
the poppies moving in a gentle breeze, especially as one’s
attention wanders over the scene. Various reproductions of
the painting, by distorting these equiluminant colors, do
not lead to an equally vivid experience of this motion.
Monet, who lived from 1840 to 1926, was one of the
founders of the French Impressionist movement, which derived its name from his painting called Impression, Soleil
Levant (Impression, Sunrise). This painting was exhibited in
1874 in an exhibition that was organized by Monet and his
associates as an alternative to the Salon de Paris. Monet’s
use of color significantly departed from the established
Academic painting style that dominated the Salon de Paris
at that time. The surfaces of his paintings of natural scenes
are built up from small brushstrokes, as in the The Poppy
Field Near Argenteuil in Figure 3.32 that Monet painted at
around this time. Using these discrete, but juxtaposed, color
elements, Monet created complex surfaces that induced
boundary webs which defined the structures of object
forms. These emergent forms can be seen even though the
individual compartments from which they are composed
are also visible when spatial attention is focused upon them.
Without a certain degree of orientational uncertainty
embedded in the boundary completion system (e.g., Figures
3.14, 3.15, and 3.17-3.21), long-range boundary completion
and emergent segmentation would be nearly impossible in
response to Monet’s paintings. His paintings exemplify the
paradoxical prediction that orientationally “fuzzy” computations o!en lead to sharp segmentations despite the fact
that there are hardly any sharp edges in them. Continuous
boundaries, smooth surface forms, and light are perceived

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

in these paintings despite the fact that they consist of irregular color patches of varying densities of luminance
and color. Observers can appreciate both the microstructure and the macrostructure (brushstrokes and scene, respectively) of his paintings as a result of the existence of
multiple scales of oriented local contrast detectors, and the
boundary groupings and filled-in surfaces that they induce
(Figure 3.22) in order for us to effectively see and interact
with the 3D world. Similar to how we can perceive both the
boundaries in the watercolor illusion and the color spread
across the weaker boundaries (Figure 3.28), we are able to
perceive many of the individual strokes of paint within
Monet’s paintings as well as the color assimilation among
these strokes within the emergent forms in his paintings.

How humans see paintings
and paintings illuminate
how humans see
The above examples of paintings by artists like Jo Baer,
Charles Hawthorne, Henry Hensche, Henri Matisse,
Claude Monet, and Georges Seurat illustrate the general
theme that, whenever an artist manipulates a canvas, and
experiences conscious percepts of an emerging painting,
the artist is performing an experiment that probes different combinations of the brain processes whereby we see.
Artists typically succeed in doing so without having explicit knowledge about the brain processes that mediate between painterly manipulation and percept. The particular
interests and aesthetic sensibilities of different artists have
led each of them to instinctively emphasize different combinations of these brain processes. These different combinations may be one hallmark of different artists’ styles, and
indeed of entire artistic movements.
Below the work of several other artists will be interspersed with scientific descriptions and explanations of
how our brains see. Paintings by Banksy, Ross Bleckner,
Leonardo da Vinci, Gene Davis, Claude Monet, Jules
Olitski, and Frank Stella will be discussed. I began this
analysis in my 2008 article (Grossberg, 2008), whose title
“The Art of Seeing and Painting” is the same as that of
Hensche’s book to emphasize its focus on similar artistic
themes. This analysis was further developed with my
PhD student Lauren Zajac in our 2017 article in the Art
& Perception journal (Grossberg and Zajac, 2017). These
examples continue to illustrate how different artists have
intuitively understood how multiple brain processes contribute to the conscious perception of a painting, and used
this understanding to achieve their own unique aesthetic
goals. In this way, the paintings of different artists clarify
how our brains consciously see paintings, while also shedding light on how paintings illuminate how our brains see.

|

111

Boundary webs, selfluminosity, glare, double
brilliant illusion, and gloss
An astonishing variety of surprising percepts can occur
when boundary webs form in response to images or scenes.
By creating boundary webs with particular properties, the
spatial context in which a luminance occurs within a scene
can even create a percept of self-luminosity, whereby different
parts of a scene seem to glow or to emit an inner light. This
can be seen in examples such as the glare effect that has been
studied by Daniele Zavagno (Zavagno, 1999), the double brilliant illusion that has been studied by Paola Bressan (Bressan,
2001), and percepts of gloss that have been studied by Jacob
Beck and Slava Prazdny (Beck and Prazdny, 1981).
In the glare effect (Figure 3.33, le! column, top row),
the interior white region of all four figures is the same, but
an increasingly strong luminance gradient surrounds this
region as one proceeds from the le! figure in the first row
to the right figure in the second row. The percept in response to the strongest gradient in the lower right image is
one of a glowing self-luminosity, with lesser effects occurring in response to the weaker luminance gradients. This
effect may be explained as the result of the boundary webs
that are generated in response to the luminance gradients
and how they control the filling-in of lightness within
themselves and abutting regions. In particular, such a
boundary web is like a continuous version of the boundary
web that enables color spreading to occur out of the weakest boundary in the watercolor illusion (Figure 3.28). Due
to the mutually inhibitory interactions across the boundaries that comprise these boundary webs, more lightness
can spread into the central square as the steepness of the
boundary gradients increases.
A similar way of thinking helps to explain the double
brilliant illusion that is illustrated in Figure 3.33 (right
column, top row). A computer simulation of this percept
is summarized in Figure 3.33 (right column, bottom two
rows) using the anchored Filling-In Lightness Model, or
aFILM, that I published in 2006 with my PhD student
Simon Hong (Grossberg and Hong, 2006). aFILM explains
and simulates this percept using mathematically rigorous
embodiments of the concepts that will be described more
fully below and in the next chapter. The upper right panel
of this simulation, labeled Anchored Lightness, shows the
model’s output of the double brilliant illusion.
Finally, there is the no less remarkable gloss effect that
is perceived in response to Figure 3.33 (le! column, bottom
row). Here two almost identical vases are shown. The right
vase is a matte vase, or vase with a dull and flat color, without
any shine or highlights. In the le! vase, a highlight has been
added to a local region of the vase surface. Remarkably, this
local change makes the entire vase look glossy compared

112

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

painter Ross Bleckner.
Bleckner has described his
paintings as attempts to
“eke out of a formal code a
maximum amount of light”
(Rankin, 1987). Bleckner
does this, not by painting
large surface areas with
high reflectances or bright
colors, but rather by creating compositions of small,
star-like, circular regions
that are perceived as selfluminous, as in Figure 3.34.
At least three interacting
properties of the paintings
in Figure 3.34 contribute
to their self-luminosity:
high luminance areas relative to a dark background;
a smooth luminance gradient that surrounds many
of them; and their small
size. The large luminance
difference enhances the efFIGURE 3.33. Various ways that spatial gradients in boundary webs can cause self-luminous perfects of brightness contrast.
cepts. See the text for details.
The luminance gradient can
enhance
self-luminosity
with the matte vase from which it was constructed. This
using boundary webs, much
glossy percept can be explained by the way in which the
as in percepts like the glare and double-brilliant percepts
boundary web that is induced by the highlight consistently
that are induced by Figure 3.33. Finally, the small size can
joins the boundary web that is generated by the rest of the
also enhance self-luminosity via a neural mechanism that
vase’s form. The lightness within the highlight can hereby
is explained in the aFILM model, and that is called the
spread to abutting areas of the vase, rendering its appearBHLAW rule.
ance glossy. As with the case of the shaded ellipse (Figure
3.21d), this boundary web is invisible and is seen
only through the gradients of surface lightnesses
that it traps within its compartments. In support
of this explanation, Beck and Prazdny showed in
1981 (Beck and Prazdny, 1981) that changing the
gradual luminance gradient of the highlight to a
spatially abrupt one, or changing its relative orientation with respect to the rest of the vase, eliminate the glossy percept.

Lightness anchoring
and Ross Bleckner’s
self-luminous paintings
Self-luminosity in paintings. Examples of
self-luminous percepts can be found in paintings as well, notably in the work of the American

FIGURE 3.34. Examples of Ross Bleckner’s self-luminous paintings.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

|

113

Blurred Highest Luminance As White and
lightness anchoring. The letters BHLAW
stand for Blurred Highest Luminance As White,
which is a neural mechanism within the aFILM
model that helps to determine when lightnesses
in a picture or scene will appear self-luminous.
This mechanism contributes to the larger issue
that is called lightness anchoring, whereby brain
networks determine what parts of a scene will
appear to be white. There is a rich and o!en paradoxical experimental literature about how the
brain does this, and along the way sometimes
generates percepts of self-luminosity. Other
famous effects for which Simon Hong and I offered mechanistic explanations include: the Gelb
effect, whereby a black surface can look white
when it is intensely illuminated; and the Area
effect that is o!en demonstrated by placing a
subject’s head within a dome that is divided into
two regions. When the higher luminance area in
the dome occupies more than half of the visual FIGURE 3.35. The Highest Luminance As White rule of Hans Wallach works
field, it appears white, while the darker region in some cases (top row) but not others (bottom row).
looks gray. When the darker luminance area occupies more than half of the visual field, it tends
When the points of light surrounded by a boundary
to look increasingly white, while the lighter area appears
web
are magnified, as in the center of Figure 3.34, they can
to be self-luminous.
still
appear self-luminous, despite their larger size. Such
The American vision scientist Alan Gilchrist and
examples
illustrate the independence of the BHLAW rule
his colleagues have been leaders in demonstrating such
and
the
selfluminosity effects that arise from boundary
anchoring effects (Gilchrist et al., 1999). Great predewebs,
since
a
boundary web with a steep gradient may
cessors in the study of how anchoring may work instill
be
present
even when the figure is too large for the
clude Helmholtz (Helmholtz, 1866) and Hans Wallach
BHLAW
rule
to
cause self-luminosity.
(Wallach, 1976), a great American vision scientist who
died in 1998. Wallach proposed his famous Highest
Luminance As White (HLAW) rule whereby
the perceptual quality “white” is assigned to the
highest luminance in a scene, and gray values of
less luminous surface regions are assigned relative to the white standard. Although this rule
works in many situations (Figure 3.35, top row),
there are many other situations in which it leads
to the wrong answer (Figure 3.35, bottom row).
The BHLAW rule that Hong and I proposed
overcomes many of these problems and enabled
us to simulate the key data reported by Gilchrist
and his colleagues (Figure 3.36). In particular, it
explains how, when the highest luminance of a
scene occupies a smaller area than the size of a
receptive field that defines the “blurring” kernel
that defines the rule (Figure 3.37, right panel),
then it will appear self-luminous, other things
being equal. When the highest luminance of
FIGURE 3.36. The Blurred Highest Luminance As White rule that I devela scene occupies a region as large as, or larger oped with my PhD student, Simon Hong, works in cases where the rule of
than, the blurring kernel, it will be renormalized Hans Wallach fails, as can be seen by comparing the simulation in Figure 3.35
with the one in this !gure.
to look white (Figure 3.37, le! panel).

114

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 3.37. How the Blurred Highest Luminance As White rule sometimes normalizes the highest luminance to white (left panel) but
at other times normalizes it to be self-luminous (right panel). See the text for details.

Boundary webs and color
field paintings: ules Olitski’s
paintings that “hang like
a cloud”
Boundary webs do not necessarily lead to percepts with
a definite 3D shape, as in Figure 3.29, or a self-luminous
percept, as in Figures 3.33 and 3.34. They can support
much more ambiguous painterly percepts. Indeed, nearly
a century a!er the Impressionists formed their movement, the abstract painting movement called Color
Field painting began to flourish in the United States.
This term is generally used to describe the canonical
Color Field painters, such as Mark Rothko and Barnett
Newman. These painters were, in turn, part of the larger
Abstract Expressionist movement and their successors,
who painted in the 1960s and 1970s, such as Jules Olitski
and Helen Frankenthaler. The Color Field painters were
primarily concerned with exploring the pure emotional
power of color. Thus, color—particularly contained
within large, ambiguously structured surfaces—is a
dominant element in these paintings. Jules Olitski created several such paintings when he lived and worked in
New York City. By 1965, Olitski developed a technique
in which he used spray bottles and guns to spray paint
onto unprimed canvases and created some of his most
famous paintings, which are known as the “spray paintings” (Figure 3.38).
Spraying paint onto a canvas in fine mists gave Olitski
control over the color density on the canvas. In contrast to many of Monet’s paintings, in which the viewer
can discern a multitude of individual brushstrokes contained within a coarse boundary web (e.g., Figure 3.32),

it is impossible to visually perceive discrete colored units
within the boundary webs in Olitski’s spray paintings.
Unlike the boundary webs for the shaded ellipse (Figure
3.21d), the boundary webs that spread over the surface of
Olitski’s spray paintings create a sense of ambiguous depth
in the viewer, similar to staring into a space filled with colored fog, or into the sky during a sunset free of discrete
clouds. Olitski intentionally created this effect, writing
that: “When the conception of internal form is governed
by edge, color . . . appears to remain on or above the surface. I think . . . of color as being seen in and throughout,
not solely on, the surface” (Riggs, 1997). Occasional sharp

FIGURE 3.38. Four color-!eld spray paintings of Jules Olitski.
The text explains why they generate surfaces percepts with such
ambiguous depth.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

spatial discontinuities along the bounding contours in
some of these paintings awaken in the viewer an acknowledgment that drawing plays little or no role in creating the
surface percept that is induced by most of the painting.
The vision models that I will describe in the next chapter
and Chapter 11 clarify why the structure of Olitski’s spray
paintings create the sense that one is looking into a mist of
color within a 3D space. These models highlight the importance of closed boundary contours to create percepts
of surfaces that are restricted to specific depth planes (cf.
Figure 3.22). Within the mists of color in Olitski’s paintings, sharp, closed boundary contours are not perceptible.
Instead, gradual chromatic and luminance spatial gradients coexist, thereby enabling multiple scales to form
boundary webs, and to thereby capture smooth color transitions on multiple depth-selective surfaces whose gradients o!en coexist at similar positions. Unlike the example
of the shaded ellipse, these gradients and their boundary
webs do not vary in either orientation or scale in a systematic way across space, as is also needed to create the percept of glossiness in the vase in Figure 3.33 (le! column,
bottom row). Thus, we do not perceive the shaded surfaces
of these paintings to be clearly contained within one depth
plane. In this way, Olitski was able to achieve color that is
“seen in and throughout”.

Gene Davis’s lines: From
color assimilation to depth
and surface-shroud
resonances
The paintings of Gene Davis provide
additional examples of how boundary
groupings and surface filling-in can influence painterly percepts of depth and size.
Although Gene Davis was a journalist, he
began to paint seriously in Washington,
D.C. in 1950. His paintings in Figure 3.39
are built up from vertical stripes. They
do not contain size differences, shading,
or recognizable objects. Despite this uniformity of each painting’s compositional
units, they nonetheless create percepts
of variable depths and sizes in different
parts of the painting. In response to the
painting in Figure 3.39 (le! column, top
row), which is called Black Popcorn, the
“brightest” stripes—namely, the four intermingled yellow and pale blue stripes
located approximately one-third of the
length of the canvas from the le!—appear

|

115

to be in the nearest depth plane. In contrast, in the painting
Flamingo (Figure 3.39, right column, top row), both individual stripes and stripe groupings can be perceived as
nearer or further in depth, with brighter stripes appearing
closer. How do these percepts arise?
For starters, color similarities and/or almost equal
luminances between stripes can influence whether the
viewer’s eyes are drawn to individual stripes or groups of
stripes. The achromatic versions of the two paintings more
clearly show regions where color assimilation is facilitated.
Note, for example, the much smaller differences in luminance of the stripes within Black Popcorn (Figure 3.39, le!
column, bottom row) than of Flamingo (Figure 3.39, right
column, bottom row). The boundaries between stripes that
have low luminance contrast are weak, thereby facilitating increased surface filling-in across several stripes. Such
color assimilation calls to mind the watercolor illusion
(Figure 3.28) and the paintings of Jo Baer (Figure 3.30). As
a result of weak boundaries and color assimilation, spatial
attention can cover a region that is larger than one stripe
during viewing of Black Popcorn, thereby enabling viewers to perceive multiple stripes as one object. Such formsensitive spatial attention is called an attentional shroud.
An attentional shroud, in turn, is created by a dynamical
state in the brain that I call a surface-shroud resonance. The
multiple roles of attentional shrouds in conscious seeing
(Table 1.4), recognition, and search will be explained in
Chapter 6.
Assimilation between stripes can influence scene stratification and apparent depth within these paintings because it can group individual stripes into larger bands. In

FIGURE 3.39. Two of Gene Davis’s paintings in full color (top row) and in the monochromatic versions (bottom row). The text explains how they achieve their different
percepts of grouping and relative depth.

116

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Black Popcorn, bright and dim stripes tend to be grouped
into larger stripes composed of four or more individual
stripes. In Flamingo, individual bright stripes tend to be
isolated between individual or groups of dimmer stripes,
and the luminance and color of adjacent stripes vary more
across space compared to those in Black Popcorn. I have
already noted how multiple-scale boundary webs can support percepts of depth in response to the textured disk and
shaded ellipse in Figures 3.21c and 3.21d. Size differences
also play a role in depth perception in these paintings
as well.
Larger objects o!en—but not always!—tend to appear
closer to the viewer because they more strongly activate larger receptive fields, or spatial scales, in the visual
system. How this works in enabling depth perception will
be discussed in Chapters 4 and 11. In the paintings of Gene
Davis, the grouping of bright stripes into larger units results in larger spatial scales being sensitive to them, which
can cause them to appear closer to the viewer. This property helps to explain why the four stripe unit in the le!
part of Black Popcorn appears to be nearer than the individual bright white stripes in Flamingo, despite the fact
that the latter stripes appear to be brighter than any individual stripe in Black Popcorn.
Flamingo contains brighter stripes and a wide range of
luminance variation, but the lack of assimilation between
the brightest stripes within the painting and their neighbors results in a less stable stratification of the stripes into
different depth planes. Grouping into larger, bright stripe
units helps one stably perceive them in
a near depth plane. The grouping and
depth effects when viewing paintings of
Gene Davis are thus not just a simple example of the proximity-contrast covariance property that can make a brighter
Kanizsa square look closer in Figure
3.3c, if only because, in these paintings,
brightness and spatial scale do not always
covary.

webs can explain, before turning to an analysis of these
neural mechanisms and how they generate conscious
visual percepts.
Many Renaissance artists learned how to use perspective cues, as illustrated in Figure 3.40 (le! column, top
row). Perspective cues can generate a percept of depth in
response to a 2D picture by activating cells with oriented
receptive fields of different sizes to different degrees, in
much the same way as a 3D scene does. A cell with an oriented receptive field is sensitive to a narrow range of favored orientations of image contrasts at its position. As
in the percepts generated by the multiple-scale texture
and the shaded ellipse of Figures 3.21c and 3.21d, and by
the paintings of Gene Davis (Figure 3.39), receptive fields
of different sizes can contribute to percepts of different
depths.
Renaissance artists also understood how to use Tjunctions, like the ones that occur where the vertical and
horizontal edges intersect in Figure 3.40 (le! column,
bottom row), or in the Kanizsa square percepts in Figure
3.3, or in the zebra image in Figure 3.21b. They realized
that putting T-junctions between a figure and its background in a picture can help to make the figure appear in
front of the background, and thereby lead to a percept of
figure-ground separation.
Chapter 4 will explain how the same boundary
grouping process that helps us to see and recognize the
Dalmatian in snow (Figure 1.2), and all the percepts
generated by the images of Figure 3.21, is also sensitive

Perspective, Tjunctions, end gaps,
and the Mona Lisa
Artists since the Renaissance have exploited many other properties of how the
brain sees for aesthetic purposes. I will
summarize a few more of these properties to illustrate the wealth of possibilities that unifying concepts like the surface filling-in of multiple-scale boundary

FIGURE 3.40. A combination of T-junctions and perspective cues can create a strong
percept of depth in response to 2D images, with a famous example being Leonardo da
Vinci’s painting of the Mona Lisa.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

to T-junctions, and can use them to trigger the initial
steps of figure-ground separation that lead to depthful
percepts. Consider, for example, the two T-junctions in
Figure 3.40 (le! column, bottom row). The horizontal
boundary that forms at the top of each T can cause a
small break in the vertical boundary that forms where the
stem of the T touches the top. This hole in the boundary
is called an end gap. How and why end gaps form, and
how they contribute to figure-ground separation, will
be explained in Chapter 4. For now, let me make the following observation to highlight the existence of end gaps:
End gaps enable neon color to spread in response to the
images in Figures 3.10 and 3.11 at positions near the ends
of the blue or red lines, where they abut the black lines
(Figure 3.41). The stronger black line boundaries inhibit
the weaker color boundaries, thereby enabling colored
feature contour activities to flow out of these boundaries,
just as it does where boundaries are weakened during the
watercolor illusion of Figure 3.28.
Perspective, T-junctions, and chiaroscuro are all employed in the Mona Lisa of Leonardo da Vinci (Figure 3.40,
right column) that hangs in the Louvre Museum in Paris.
Each of these processes affects the perceptual grouping
process in its own way to create the 3D appearance of the
Mona Lisa and to project her in front of the landscape
background.

Frank Stella: Occlusions,
amodal completions,
kineticism, and spatial
attention shifts

|

117

These processes, in turn, affect the formation of attentional
shrouds that organize how spatial attention is allocated as
we view them. The larger stripe groupings within Black
Popcorn illustrate how a larger-scale attentional shroud
can help to induce a percept of nearer depth. Paintings like
the Mona Lisa illustrate how T-junctions can influence
percepts of depth. Frank Stella’s Protractor paintings exploit the perceptual consequences of both kinds of perceptual cues, among others.
These Stella paintings are abstract, brightly colored,
and contain a number of interwoven and/or overlapping figures. The series is called the Protractor series because the paintings in this series are based on the semicircular form of a protractor. Figure 3.42 (top row) shows
Firuzabad and Figure 4.42 (bottom row) shows Khurasan
Gate (Variation) I. In describing Firuzabad and other
similarly-structured paintings, Stella wrote: “I was looking
for a really symmetrical base and the protractor image provided that for me. Firuzabad is a good example of looking
for stability and trying to create as much instability as
possible. ‘Cause those things are like bicycle wheels spinning around’ ” (Frank Stella and the art of the protractor,
Anonymous, 2000).
Stella also describes being inspired by decorative art
in Iran in which patterns “doubled back on themselves”
(“Collection: MOCA’s first thirty years”, 2010). Others
have described these paintings as having an “engaging kineticism” (“Collection: MOCA’s first thirty years”, 2010)
because the paintings contain interwoven patterns that
create a sense of movement in the viewer.
The brain processes that lead to these percepts will be
explained more completely below, but here I can immediately make the following qualitative observations. In

The luminance and color structure within a painting affects how it groups and stratifies the figures within it.

FIGURE 3.41. End gaps, or small breaks or weakenings of
boundaries, can form where a stronger boundary abuts a weaker,
like- oriented, boundary, as occurs where black boundaries touch
red boundaries in the neon color spreading image of Figure 3.11.

FIGURE 3.42. Two paintings of Frank Stella. See the text for

details.

118

| Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

Firuzabad, the circular form of the outer protractor shapes
mirrors the shapes of the interlocking rings within the
painting. The T-junctions where the surfaces of differentlycolored segments meet, signal which segments weave in
front of other segments. As in many other percepts, end
gaps support boundary completion of the nearer figure
and a discontinuity in the boundary of the figure that is
“behind” the nearer figure. Only the non-occluded part of
each figure is consciously seen, but whole protractor figures may nonetheless be amodally recognized, much as
in response to the partially occluded shapes in Figures 1.3
and 1.4.
The center region of Firuzabad contains a number of
interwoven segments, some of which are recognized as
whole protractors due to amodal completion, and others
as smaller segments that are nested in the overall circular shape of the canvas and/or within other protractors. Importantly, no one segment in this center portion
of Firuzabad is “on top” of all the others; each segment
weaves under and over other segments.
Similarly, in Khurasan Gate (Variation) I, no one segment, or protractor, in the entire painting lies completely
on top of all the others, even though each distinctly colored protractor segment has exposed visible regions that
are sufficient to allow the viewer to understand the whole
shape of the protractor. As a result, these structures are
perceived as overlapping segments in different, but similar,
depth planes. Importantly, amodal boundary completion
and surface filling-in of distinct segment colors help us
divide the painting into separate, interlocking protractor
forms that are tightly linked in a larger structure. In particular, amodal boundary completion allows perceptual completion of protractor boundaries that lay behind
other forms. At the same time, consistent segment colors
that surround amodally-completed protractor surfaces
allow disconnected segments to emerge as unified protractor surfaces. These boundary and surface completion
processes enable an attentional shroud to spread across a
whole protractor form, whether or not the entire form is
consciously visible. Once an attentional shroud can form
on a given protractor, a surface-shroud resonance regulates eye movement sequences to different regions of this
particular protractor, and guides these movements in and
out of different depth planes, because no one protractor
lies on top of all the others. How a surface-shroud resonance directs eye movements to search a surface will be
explained in Chapter 6.
An attentional shroud that adheres to one protractor
surface inevitably collapses. Collapse can be due either to
inhibition of return or to activity-dependent habituation of
the surface-shroud resonance itself. Said in another way,
we have a tendency not to perseverate at looking at the
same position in space over and over again (inhibition of
return) and we tend to get bored looking at the same object
for too long (activity-dependent habituation). When a

shroud collapses, spatial attention is disengaged from that
object surface, thereby freeing it to become engaged by a
new surface of interest, as many cognitive neuroscientists
have noted since Michael Posner discussed this property
in 1980 (Posner, 1980).
Because multiple boundary groupings are possible
within the Stella paintings due to the clever nesting of protractor figures between each another, and within the shape
of the canvas as a whole, attentional shrouds can span
individual segments or multiple segments at a time. For
example, in Firuzabad, one can perceive two full circles,
multiple nested protractor structures, and each individual
segment within the painting. The multiple groupings and
segmentations within these paintings, along with the attendant formation and collapse of their surface-shroud
resonances as the eyes explore the painting, contributes
to their perceived dynamism. The attentional shi!s and
eye movements through different depth planes and across
different segmentations of these static interleaved patterns
create the sense of visual movement that are a hallmark of
Stella’s paintings.

Back to Monet: Gist,
multiple-scale attentional
shrouds, and scene
recognition
As discussed in the context of the paintings of Gene Davis
and Frank Stella, artists can direct viewers’ attention
across a painting through the composition and grouping of
its features. Many artists do this with a conceptual or aesthetic goal in mind. In the case of Impressionist painters
like Monet (Figure 3.32) and Seurat (Figure 3.23), viewers
can perceive individual visible brushstrokes as well as the
emergent forms that these brushstrokes induce through
boundary cooperation and competition among them. In
addition, Monet’s painting technique supported his desire
to preserve a fresh “first glance” at a painting, and how he
achieved this illustrates an important general theme about
how we understand all scenes.
Monet’s painting process started with distributed
patches of local contrast and slowly added to these patches
until long-range cooperation between his brushstrokes
could more easily and unambiguously occur. In 1927, a
year a!er Monet died, Lilla Cabot Perry described a canvas
that Monet had painted only once (Perry, 1927): “It was
covered with strokes about an inch apart and a quarter of
an inch thick, out to the very edge of the canvas”. She also
described a canvas that was painted twice: “The strokes
were nearer together and the subject began to emerge
more clearly”. Monet directly painted the visible colors in

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

a scene as he viewed it, rather than constructing a scene by
drawing its boundaries and then filling them in. Support
for this idea lies within Monet’s advice: “When you go out
to paint, try to forget what objects you have before you,
a tree, a house, a field, or whatever. Merely think, here is
a little square of blue, here an oblong of pink . . . paint
it just as it looks to you, the exact color and shape, until
it gives your own naïve impression of the scene before
you”. This approach to painting was vigorously pursued by
many subsequent painters, notably plein air painters such
as other Impressionists, Charles Hawthorne, and Henry
Hensche (Figure 3.31).
Monet’s painting process reflects how humans may
initially, and very rapidly, perceive coarse global information about a scene. This process is o!en called “getting
the gist” of the scene. Gist can include being able to recognize what kind of scene it is, whether of a city street,
a mountain range, or a body of water. A!er gist is computed, spatial attention and the eye movements that it
controls can zoom into finer details of the scene. Chapter
14 explains how gist may be rapidly computed as a largescale, or spatially coarse, texture category. Then shi!s of
spatial attention may form finer attentional shrouds to
enable finer scenic textures to be classified. When the gist
category and a few finer texture categories vote on the
best interpretation of a scene, very high classification accuracy can be achieved.
The principle that scene gist is the first available information in a scene is mirrored by Monet’s aesthetic goal to
preserve the first glance, or first impression, of a scene and
allow it to determine the course of the painting. As Perry
wrote in 1927 (Perry, 1927): “[Monet] held that the first
real look at the motif was likely to be the truest and most
unprejudiced one, and said that the first painting should
cover as much of the canvas as possible, no matter how
roughly, so as to determine at the outset the tonality of the
whole”.
Monet instinctively carried out the kind of globalto-local process of painting a natural scene that humans
use to understand scenes, gradually building detail with
more and more brushstrokes, but never explicitly drawing
fine scenic structures. For example, in the paintings of
the Rouen cathedral shown in Figures 3.43 and 3.44, the
viewer can infer that there are sculptural elements on the
facade of the cathedral, but the fine structure of these elements is not explicitly present in the paintings. Monet recognized that the coarse, global information in a scene is
what one sees during the “first real look” and preserved
the freshness of this first look at a scene by eliminating
distracting details. Monet hereby enabled the largerscale attentional shrouds to dominate viewers’ perception
and understanding of the scenes that are depicted in his
paintings.
Impressionist painting relies on the ability of the
visual system to form amodal boundaries and emergent

|

119

segmentations from the statistics of visual stimuli. In
some of his mature work, Monet uses nearby colors that
are nearly equiluminant, and sharp, high-contrast,
luminance-defined edges are sparse. He hereby creates
weaker boundary signals within and between the parts
of many forms, and stronger boundary signals between
forms. This combination facilitates color spreading within
forms and better separation of brightness and color differences between forms. Figure 3.43 (top row) shows four
paintings from Monet’s Rouen Cathedral series and their
grayscale counterparts (Figure 3.43, bottom row). This
famous series, created in the 1890s, includes over 30 paintings of similar views of the Rouen Cathedral at different
times of day. The grayscale versions of these paintings
demonstrate the near equiluminance of the brushstrokes
within forms, and places in which brightness and color
differences significantly influence the groupings that differentiate between forms, including the differentiation between the cathedral and the sky.
Monet took advantage of the statistical uncertainty
that our visual system overcomes to create work in which
both color and luminance play a role in creating form,
rather than luminance alone, as in the first and fourth
images from le! to right. It is instructive to compare and
contrast these paintings with those of Gene Davis (Figure
3.39), even though their subject matter is totally different.
Taking the color out of Monet’s paintings removes some
of the critical closed boundaries that allow us to segregate forms within it. The boundary system pools color
and brightness signals, as also occurs to create boundaries in response to the gray disks on the black-and-white
checkerboard in Figure 3.2, and the reverse-contrast
Kanizsa square in Figure 3.3b. As a result, boundaries
can form that may be due almost entirely to a color difference, without a corresponding achromatic brightness
difference, as in the fourth image to the right in the upper
row of Figure 3.43.
Figures 3.44-3.46 further discuss two paintings from
Monet’s Rouen cathedral series that illustrate how different lighting of the same object can lead to dramatically
different percepts. The painting in Figure 3.44 captures
the lighting on the cathedral facade while the sun is setting, whereas the painting in Figures 3.45 and 3.46 does
so in full sunlight. The painting in full sunlight generates a more depthful percept than does the one at sunset.
This is due to multiple factors interacting together. One
factor is that the colors in the painting at sunset are more
equiluminant, and the ensuing boundary webs coarser
and more uniform. The strong gradients of light that
are evident in the painting in full sunlight, including
effects of sharp architectural features and shadows, are
not seen at sunset. The greater range of contrasts in
the right painting also enable many more nearly horizontal boundaries to be clearly seen as occluded by vertical boundaries. Such T-junction boundary occlusions

120

|

Conscious MIND Resonant BRAIN

FIGURE 3.43. Four paintings by Monet of the Rouen cathedral under different lighting conditions (top row) and their monochromatic
versions (bottom row). See the text for details.

FIGURE 3.44. The Rouen cathedral at sunset generates very different boundary webs than it does in full sunlight, as illustrated by

Figure 3.45.

How a Brain Sees: Constructing Reality

|

121

FIGURE 3.45. The Rouen cathedral in full sunlight.

FIGURE 3.46. The Rouen cathedral in full sunlight contains T-junctions that are not salient in the painting of it at simset. These are
among the painting’s features that give it a much more depthful appearance.

(Figure 3.46) can generate percepts of depth in the absence of any other visual cues.
The next chapter begins to explain in greater detail
how the rich variety of perceptual properties of boundary

grouping and surface filling-in processes are generated
in our brains, whether during the most mundane activities of our daily lives, or during our appreciation of great
visual art.

